Bird


Birds are a group of warm-blooded vertebrates





Birds


constituting the class Aves (/ˈeɪviːz/), characterised by Temporal range:

feathers, toothless beaked jaws, the laying of hard-

Possible Early Cretaceous or early Late

shelled eggs, a high metabolic rate, a four-chambered Cretaceous origin based on molecular

heart, and a strong yet lightweight skeleton. Birds live worldwide and range in size from the 5.5 cm (2.2 in)

clock[3][4][5]

bee hummingbird to the 2.8 m (9 ft 2 in) common

ostrich. There are over 11,000 living species, more than

half of which are passerine, or "perching" birds. Birds

have wings whose development varies according to

species; the only known groups without wings are the

extinct moa and elephant birds. Wings, which are modified forelimbs, gave birds the ability to fly,

although further evolution has led to the loss of flight in

some birds, including ratites, penguins, and diverse

endemic island species. The digestive and respiratory

systems of birds are also uniquely adapted for flight.

Some bird species of aquatic environments, particularly

seabirds and some waterbirds, have further evolved for swimming. The study of birds is called ornithology.

Birds are feathered theropod dinosaurs and constitute the only known living dinosaurs. Likewise, birds are

considered reptiles in the modern cladistic sense of the term, and their closest living relatives are the

crocodilians. Birds are descendants of the primitive

avialans (whose members include Archaeopteryx)

Scientific classification

which first appeared during the Late Jurassic.

According to recent estimates, modern birds

Domain:

Eukaryota

(Neornithes) evolved in the Late Cretaceous and

Kingdom:

Animalia

diversified dramatically around the time of the

Phylum:

Chordata

Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event 66 million

years ago, which killed off the pterosaurs and all non-

Clade:

Sauropsida

avian dinosaurs.[7]

Clade:

Archosauria

Many social species pass on knowledge across

Clade:

Avemetatarsalia

generations, which is considered a form of culture.

Clade:

Dinosauria

Birds are social, communicating with visual signals,

Clade:

Theropoda

calls, and songs, and participating in such behaviours as

cooperative breeding and hunting, flocking, and Clade:

Ornithurae

mobbing of predators. The vast majority of bird species



are socially (but not necessarily sexually) monogamous,

Class:

Aves

usually for one breeding season at a time, sometimes

Linnaeus, 1758[6]

for years, and rarely for life. Other species have

Extant clades

breeding systems that are polygynous (one male with

many females) or, rarely, polyandrous (one female with

Palaeognathae (ratites and tinamou)

many males). Birds produce offspring by laying eggs

which are fertilised through sexual reproduction. They

Struthionimorphae (ostrich)

are usually laid in a nest and incubated by the parents.

Notopalaeognathae

Most birds have an extended period of parental care

after hatching.

Neognathae

Many species of birds are economically important as

Pangalloanserae (fowl)

food for human consumption and raw material in

Neoaves

manufacturing, with domesticated and undomesticated

birds being important sources of eggs, meat, and

Synonyms

feathers. Songbirds, parrots, and other species are

Neornithes Gadow, 1883

popular as pets. Guano (bird excrement) is harvested

for use as a fertiliser. Birds figure throughout human

culture. About 120 to 130 species have become extinct due to human activity since the 17th century, and hundreds more before then. Human activity threatens about 1,200 bird species with extinction, though

efforts are underway to protect them. Recreational birdwatching is an important part of the ecotourism

industry.





Evolution and classification


The first classification of birds was developed by Francis Willughby

and John Ray in their 1676 volume Ornithologiae.[8] Carl Linnaeus

modified that work in 1758 to devise the taxonomic classification

system currently in use. [9] Birds are categorised as the biological

class Aves in Linnaean taxonomy. Phylogenetic taxonomy places Aves in the clade Theropoda. [10]





Definition


Aves and a sister group, the order Crocodilia, contain the only

living representatives of the reptile clade Archosauria. During the

late 1990s, Aves was most commonly defined phylogenetically as

all descendants of the most recent common ancestor of modern

birds and Archaeopteryx lithographica. [11] However, an earlier definition proposed by Jacques Gauthier gained wide currency in

Archaeopteryx is often considered

the 21st century, and is used by many scientists including adherents

the oldest known true bird.

to the PhyloCode. Gauthier defined Aves to include only the crown

group of the set of modern birds. This was done by excluding most

groups known only from fossils, and assigning them, instead, to the broader group Avialae,[12] on the principle that a clade based on extant species should be limited to those extant species and their closest

extinct relatives.[12]

Gauthier and de Queiroz identified four different definitions for the same biological name "Aves", which is

a problem. [13] The authors proposed to reserve the term Aves only for the crown group consisting of the last

common ancestor of all living birds and all of its descendants, [13] which corresponds to meaning number 4

below. They assigned other names to the other groups.[13]

1. Aves can mean all archosaurs closer

Squamates

to birds than to crocodiles (alternately

Lizards & snakes





Avemetatarsalia)

2. Aves can mean those advanced

Pantestudines Turtles



archosaurs with feathers (alternately

Reptiles

Avifilopluma)





Crocodiles

3. Aves can mean those feathered





Archosaurs

dinosaurs that fly (alternately Avialae)





Birds


4. Aves can mean the last common



ancestor of all the currently living birds

The birds' phylogenetic relationships to major living

and all of its descendants (a " crown

reptile groups. (The turtles' position is uncertain: Some

group" , in this sense synonymous with

authorities embed them inside the Archosaurs, with birds and

Neornithes)

crocodiles. )

Under the fourth definition Archaeopteryx,

traditionally considered one of the earliest members of Aves, is removed from this group, becoming a non-

avian dinosaur instead. These proposals have been adopted by many researchers in the field of

palaeontology and bird evolution, though the exact definitions applied have been inconsistent. Avialae, initially proposed to replace the traditional fossil content of Aves, is often used synonymously with the

vernacular term "bird" by these researchers. [14]

† Coelurus





† Ornitholestes





†Ornithomimosauria



Maniraptoromorpha



†Alvarezsauridae





Maniraptoriformes



Maniraptora

†Oviraptorosauria





Pennaraptora



Paraves



Cladogram showing the results of a phylogenetic study by Cau, 2018. [15]

Most researchers define Avialae as branch-based clade, though definitions vary. Many authors have used a

definition similar to "all theropods closer to birds than to Deinonychus" ,[16][17] with Troodon being sometimes added as a second external specifier in case it is closer to birds than to Deinonychus. [18] Avialae

is also occasionally defined as an apomorphy-based clade (that is, one based on physical characteristics).

Jacques Gauthier, who named Avialae in 1986, re-defined it in 2001 as all dinosaurs that possessed feathered wings used in flapping flight, and the birds that descended from them. [13][19]





Despite being currently one of the most widely used, the crown-group definition of Aves has been criticised

by some researchers. Lee and Spencer (1997) argued that, contrary to what Gauthier defended, this

definition would not increase the stability of the clade and the exact content of Aves will always be

uncertain because any defined clade (either crown or not) will have few synapomorphies distinguishing it

from its closest relatives. Their alternative definition is synonymous to Avifilopluma.[20]

Dinosaurs and the origin of birds

†Scansoriopterygidae





† Eosinopteryx



† Jinfengopteryx

Simplified phylogenetic tree showing the

† Aurornis

relationship between modern birds and other

Paraves

dinosaurs[22]





†Dromaeosauridae

Eumaniraptora



Based on fossil and biological evidence, most

†Troodontidae

scientists accept that birds are a specialised subgroup

of theropod dinosaurs[23] and, more specifically,

Avialae



members of Maniraptora, a group of theropods which

includes dromaeosaurids and oviraptorosaurs, among Cladogram fol owing the results of a phylogenetic

others. [24] As scientists have discovered more

study by Cau et al. , 2015[21]

theropods closely related to birds, the previously clear

distinction between non-birds and birds has become blurred. By the 2000s, discoveries in the Liaoning

Province of northeast China, which demonstrated many small theropod feathered dinosaurs, contributed to this ambiguity. [25][26][27]

The consensus view in contemporary palaeontology is that the

flying theropods, or avialans, are the closest relatives of the

deinonychosaurs,

which

include

dromaeosaurids

and

troodontids. [29] Together, these form a group called Paraves. Some

basal members of Deinonychosauria, such as Microraptor, have features which may have enabled them to glide or fly. The most

basal deinonychosaurs were very small. This evidence raises the

possibility that the ancestor of all paravians may have been arboreal,

have been able to glide, or both. [30][31] Unlike Archaeopteryx and

the non-avialan feathered dinosaurs, who primarily ate meat, studies

suggest that the first avialans were omnivores. [32]

Anchiornis huxleyi is an important

source of information on the early

The Late Jurassic Archaeopteryx is well known as one of the first

evolution of birds in the Late

transitional fossils to be found, and it provided support for the

Jurassic period. [28]

theory of evolution in the late 19th century. Archaeopteryx was the

first fossil to display both clearly traditional reptilian characteristics



—teeth, clawed fingers, and a long, lizard-like tail—as well as wings with flight feathers similar to those of

modern birds. It is not considered a direct ancestor of birds, though it is possibly closely related to the true

ancestor.[33]





Early evolution


Over 40% of key traits found in modern birds evolved during the

60 million year transition from the earliest bird-line archosaurs to

the first maniraptoromorphs, i.e. the first dinosaurs closer to living

birds than to Tyrannosaurus rex. The loss of osteoderms otherwise

common in archosaurs and acquisition of primitive feathers might

have occurred early during this phase. [15][35] After the appearance

Confuciusornis sanctus, a

of Maniraptoromorpha, the next 40 million years marked a

Cretaceous bird from China that lived

continuous reduction of body size and the accumulation of neotenic

125 million years ago, is the oldest

(juvenile-like) characteristics. Hypercarnivory became increasingly

known bird to have a beak. [34]

less common while braincases enlarged and forelimbs became

longer.[15] The integument evolved into complex, pennaceous

feathers. [35]

The oldest known paravian (and probably the earliest avialan) fossils come from the Tiaojishan Formation

of China, which has been dated to the late Jurassic period (Oxfordian stage), about 160 million years ago.

The avialan species from this time period include Anchiornis huxleyi, Xiaotingia zhengi, and Aurornis

xui. [14]

The well-known probable early avialan, Archaeopteryx, dates from slightly later Jurassic rocks (about

155 million years old) from Germany. Many of these early avialans shared unusual anatomical features that may be ancestral to modern birds but were later lost during bird evolution. These features include enlarged

claws on the second toe which may have been held clear of the ground in life, and long feathers or "hind

wings" covering the hind limbs and feet, which may have been used in aerial maneuvering.[36]

Avialans diversified into a wide variety of forms during the Cretaceous period. Many groups retained

primitive characteristics, such as clawed wings and teeth, though the latter were lost independently in a number of avialan groups, including modern birds (Aves).[37] Increasingly stiff tails (especially the

outermost half) can be seen in the evolution of maniraptoromorphs, and this process culminated in the

appearance of the pygostyle, an ossification of fused tail vertebrae.[15] In the late Cretaceous, about 100 million years ago, the ancestors of all modern birds evolved a more open pelvis, allowing them to lay

larger eggs compared to body size. [38] Around 95 million years ago, they evolved a better sense of

smell. [39]

A third stage of bird evolution starting with Ornithothoraces (the "bird-chested" avialans) can be associated with the refining of aerodynamics and flight capabilities, and the loss or co-ossification of several skeletal

features. Particularly significant are the development of an enlarged, keeled sternum and the alula, and the loss of grasping hands. [15]

Avialae





Early diversity of


† Anchiornis





bird ancestors


† Archaeopteryx



The first large, diverse

† Xiaotingia

lineage

of

short-tailed



avialans to evolve were the

† Rahonavis

Enantiornithes, or "opposite



birds", so named because

† Jeholornis

the construction of their





shoulder bones was in



† Jixiangornis

reverse to that of modern



birds.

Enantiornithes



† Balaur

occupied a wide array of



ecological niches, from

† Zhongjianornis



sand-probing shorebirds and





fish-eaters to tree-dwelling





† Sapeornis



forms

and

seed-eaters.





While they were the



†Confuciusornithiformes

dominant group of avialans



Euavialae



during

the

Cretaceous

Avebrevicauda

† Protopteryx



period,

enantiornithes





Pygostylia

became extinct along with





† Pengornis



many other dinosaur groups



at the end of the Mesozoic

Ornithothoraces



era.[37][41]

Cladogram fol owing the results of a phylogenetic study by Cau et al. ,

Many species of the second

2015[21]

major

avialan

lineage

to



†Enantiornithes



diversify,

the

Euornithes



† Archaeorhynchus



(meaning "true

birds", because

†Patagopteryx



they include the

ancestors

of

†Vorona



modern

birds),

were

semi-

†Schizooura



aquatic

and

specialised

in

†Hongshanornithidae



eating fish and

other

small

†Jianchangornis



aquatic

organisms.

†Songlingornithidae



Unlike

the

Ornithothoraces





Enantiornithes,

Euornithes

†Gansus



Ornithuromorpha



which dominated





land-based and



†Apsaravis





arboreal habitats,



Ornithurae



most

early



†Hesperornithes





euornithes



† Ichthyornis



lacked perching





adaptations and

† Vegavis

likely included



shorebird-like





Aves


species, waders,

Mesozoic bird phylogeny simplified after Wang et al., 2015's phylogenetic analysis[40]

and swimming

and diving species.[42]

The latter included the superficially gull-like Ichthyornis[43] and the

Hesperornithiformes, which became so well adapted to hunting fish in

marine environments that they lost the ability to fly and became primarily

aquatic.[37] The early euornithes also saw the development of many traits

associated with modern birds, like strongly keeled breastbones, toothless,

beaked portions of their jaws (though most non-avian euornithes retained

Ichthyornis, which lived

teeth in other parts of the jaws). [44] Euornithes also included the first

93 million years ago, was

avialans to develop true pygostyle and a fully mobile fan of tail feathers, [45]

the first known prehistoric

which may have replaced the "hind wing" as the primary mode of aerial

bird relative preserved with

maneuverability and braking in flight. [36]

teeth.

A study on mosaic evolution in the avian skull found that the last common

ancestor of all Neornithes might have had a beak similar to that of the modern hook-billed vanga and a skull similar to that of the Eurasian golden oriole. As both species are small aerial and canopy foraging omnivores, a similar ecological niche was inferred for this hypothetical ancestor.[46]





Diversification of modern birds


Most studies agree on a Cretaceous age

Palaeognathae (ratites and tinamous)

for the most recent common ancestor of



modern birds but estimates range from

(landfowl

and

the Early Cretaceous[3][47] to the latest

Gal oanserae waterfowl)



Cretaceous. [48][4] Similarly, there is no





Aves


agreement on whether most of the early



Neognathae

(all

other

birds

diversification of modern birds occurred



Neoaves

including

perching

in the Cretaceous and associated with



birds)

breakup

of

the

supercontinent

Gondwana or occurred later and

Major groups of modern birds based on Sibley-Ahlquist

potentially as a consequence of the

taxonomy

Cretaceous–Palaeogene

extinction

event. [49] This disagreement is in part caused by a divergence in the evidence; most molecular dating studies suggests a Cretaceous evolutionary radiation, while fossil evidence points to a Cenozoic radiation (the so-called 'rocks' versus 'clocks' controversy).

The discovery of Vegavis from the Maastrichtian, the last stage of the Late Cretaceous proved that the diversification of modern birds started before the Cenozoic era. [50] The affinities of an earlier fossil, the possible galliform Austinornis lentus, dated to about 85 million years ago, [51] are still too controversial to





provide a fossil evidence of modern bird diversification. In 2020, Asteriornis from the Maastrichtian was described, it appears to be a close relative of Galloanserae, the earliest diverging lineage within Neognathae.[1]

Attempts to reconcile molecular and fossil evidence using genomic-scale DNA data and comprehensive

fossil information have not resolved the controversy.[48][52] However, a 2015 estimate that used a new method for calibrating molecular clocks confirmed that while modern birds originated early in the Late Cretaceous, likely in Western Gondwana, a pulse of diversification in all major groups occurred around the Cretaceous–Palaeogene extinction event.[7] Modern birds would have expanded from West Gondwana

through two routes. One route was an Antarctic interchange in the Paleogene. The other route was probably

via Paleocene land bridges between South American and North America, which allowed for the rapid

expansion and diversification of Neornithes into the Holarctic and Paleotropics. [7] On the other hand, the occurrence of Asteriornis in the Northern Hemisphere suggest that Neornithes dispersed out of East

Gondwana before the Paleocene.[1]





Classification of bird orders


All modern birds lie within the crown group Aves (alternately Neornithes), which has two subdivisions: the

Palaeognathae, which includes the flightless ratites (such as the ostriches) and the weak-flying tinamous,

and the extremely diverse Neognathae, containing all other birds.[53] These two subdivisions have variously been given the rank of superorder, [54] cohort, [10] or infraclass.[55] The number of known living bird species is around 11,000[56][57] although sources may differ in their precise numbers.

Cladogram of modern bird relationships based on Stiller et al. (2024). [58]





Aves


Struthioniformes (ostriches)



Tinamiformes (tinamous)





Rheiformes (rheas)

Palaeognathae





Apterygiformes (kiwis)





Casuariiformes (emu and cassowaries)



Neognathae

Galliformes (chickens and relatives)



Gal oanserae





Anseriformes (ducks and relatives)

Neoaves

Phoenicopteriformes (flamingos)



Mirandornithes





Podicipediformes (grebes)





Columbiformes (pigeons and do

Columbimorphae Mesitornithiformes (mesites)





Pterocliformes (sandgrouse)



Cuculiformes (cuckoos)

Columbaves



Otidiformes (bustards)

Otidimorphae





Musophagiformes (turacos)





Elementaves



Opisthocomiformes (ho





Gruiformes (rails and



Gruimorphae



Charadriiformes (wad



Strisores



Capri



Vanescaves

Nyct





Ste





Da

Eurypygimorphae





Phaethoquornithes





Aequornithes





Tel uraves

Afroaves



Strigifor





Cathar





Accipitrimorphae



Accipit





Coraci morphae





Cavitave





Cariami



Australaves



Eufalconimorphae



Psittaco



The classification of birds is a contentious issue. Sibley and Ahlquist's Phylogeny and Classification of Birds (1990) is a landmark work on the subject. [60] Most evidence seems to suggest the assignment of

orders is accurate, [61] but scientists disagree about the relationships among the orders themselves; evidence

from modern bird anatomy, fossils and DNA have all been brought to bear on the problem, but no strong

consensus has emerged. Fossil and molecular evidence from the 2010s is providing an increasingly clear

picture of the evolution of modern bird orders. [48][52]





Genomics


As of 2010, the genome had been sequenced for only two birds, the chicken and the zebra finch. As of 2022 the genomes of 542 species of birds had been completed. At least one genome has been sequenced

from every order. [62][63] These include at least one species in about 90% of extant avian families (218 out

of 236 families recognised by the Howard and Moore Checklist).[64]

Being able to sequence and compare whole genomes gives researchers many types of information, about

genes, the DNA that regulates the genes, and their evolutionary history. This has led to reconsideration of

some of the classifications that were based solely on the identification of protein-coding genes. Waterbirds

such as pelicans and flamingos, for example, may have in common specific adaptations suited to their environment that were developed independently. [62][63]





Distribution


Birds live and breed in most terrestrial habitats and on all seven

continents, reaching their southern extreme in the snow petrel's

breeding colonies up to 440 kilometres (270 mi) inland in

Antarctica.[66] The highest bird diversity occurs in tropical regions.

It was earlier thought that this high diversity was the result of higher

speciation rates in the tropics; however studies from the 2000s

found higher speciation rates in the high latitudes that were offset

by greater extinction rates than in the tropics.[67] Many species

The range of the house sparrow has

migrate annually over great distances and across oceans; several

expanded dramatically due to human

activities. [65]

families of birds have adapted to life both on the world's oceans and

in them, and some seabird species come ashore only to breed,[68]

while some penguins have been recorded diving up to 300 metres

(980 ft) deep. [69]

Many bird species have established breeding populations in areas to which they have been introduced by humans. Some of these introductions have been deliberate; the ring-necked pheasant, for example, has been introduced around the world as a game bird. [70] Others have been accidental, such as the establishment of wild monk parakeets in several North American cities after their escape from captivity.[71] Some species, including cattle egret,[72] yellow-headed caracara[73] and galah, [74] have spread naturally far beyond their original ranges as agricultural expansion created alternative habitats although modern practices of intensive agriculture have negatively impacted farmland bird populations.[75]





Anatomy and physiology




Compared with other vertebrates, birds have a body

plan that shows many unusual adaptations, mostly to

facilitate flight.





Skeletal system


The skeleton consists of very lightweight bones. They

have large air-filled cavities (called pneumatic cavities)

which connect with the respiratory system. [76] The

skull bones in adults are fused and do not show cranial

sutures. [77] The orbital cavities that house the eyeballs External anatomy of a bird (example: yellow-

are large and separated from each other by a bony

wattled lapwing): 1 Beak, 2 Head, 3 Iris, 4 Pupil, 5

septum (partition). The spine has cervical, thoracic, Mantle, 6 Lesser coverts, 7 Scapulars, 8 Median

lumbar and caudal regions with the number of cervical

coverts, 9 Tertials, 10 Rump, 11 Primaries, 12

(neck) vertebrae highly variable and especially flexible,

Vent, 13 Thigh, 14 Tibio-tarsal articulation, 15

but movement is reduced in the anterior thoracic

Tarsus, 16 Foot, 17 Tibia, 18 Belly, 19 Flanks, 20

vertebrae and absent in the later vertebrae. [78] The last

Breast, 21 Throat, 22 Wattle, 23 Eyestripe

few are fused with the pelvis to form the

synsacrum. [77] The ribs are flattened and the sternum is keeled for the attachment of flight muscles except in the flightless bird orders. The forelimbs are modified

into wings.[79] The wings are more or less developed depending on the species; the only known groups that

lost their wings are the extinct moa and elephant birds. [80]





Excretory system


Like the reptiles, birds are primarily uricotelic, that is, their kidneys extract nitrogenous waste from their bloodstream and excrete it as uric acid, instead of urea or ammonia, through the ureters into the intestine.

Birds do not have a urinary bladder or external urethral opening and (with exception of the ostrich) uric acid is excreted along with faeces as a semisolid waste.[81][82][83] However, birds such as hummingbirds can be

facultatively ammonotelic, excreting most of the nitrogenous wastes as ammonia. [84] They also excrete

creatine, rather than creatinine like mammals. [77] This material, as well as the output of the intestines, emerges from the bird's cloaca. [85][86] The cloaca is a multi-purpose opening: waste is expelled through it, most birds mate by joining cloaca, and females lay eggs from it. In addition, many species of birds regurgitate pellets. [87]

It is a common but not universal feature of altricial passerine nestlings (born helpless, under constant parental care) that instead of excreting directly into the nest, they produce a fecal sac. This is a mucus-covered pouch that allows parents to either dispose of the waste outside the nest or to recycle the waste

through their own digestive system.[88]





Reproductive system


Most male birds do not have intromittent penises. [89] Males within Palaeognathae (with the exception of the

kiwis), the Anseriformes (with the exception of screamers), and in rudimentary forms in Galliformes (but fully developed in Cracidae) possess a penis, which is never present in Neoaves. [90][91] Its length is thought to be related to sperm competition[92] and it fills with lymphatic fluid instead of blood when erect.[93] When not copulating, it is hidden within the proctodeum compartment within the cloaca, just inside the vent.

Female birds have sperm storage tubules[94] that allow sperm to remain viable long after copulation, a hundred days in some species. [95] Sperm from multiple males may compete through this mechanism. Most female birds have a single ovary and a single oviduct, both on the left side,[96] but there are exceptions: species in at least 16 different orders of birds have two ovaries. Even these species, however, tend to have a

single oviduct.[96] It has been speculated that this might be an adaptation to flight, but males have two

testes, and it is also observed that the gonads in both sexes decrease dramatically in size outside the

breeding season. [97][98] Also terrestrial birds generally have a single ovary, as does the platypus, an egg-laying mammal. A more likely explanation is that the egg develops a shell while passing through the oviduct

over a period of about a day, so that if two eggs were to develop at the same time, there would be a risk to

survival.[96] While rare, mostly abortive, parthenogenesis is not unknown in birds and eggs can be diploid,

automictic and results in male offspring. [99]

Birds are solely gonochoric. [100] Meaning they have two sexes: either female or male. The sex of birds is determined by the Z and W sex chromosomes, rather than by the X and Y chromosomes present in

mammals. Male birds have two Z chromosomes (ZZ), and female birds have a W chromosome and a Z

chromosome (WZ). [77] A complex system of disassortative mating with two morphs is involved in the

white-throated sparrow Zonotrichia albicollis, where white- and tan-browed morphs of opposite sex pair, making it appear as if four sexes were involved since any individual is compatible with only a fourth of the

population.[101]

In nearly all species of birds, an individual's sex is determined at fertilisation. However, one 2007 study

claimed to demonstrate temperature-dependent sex determination among the Australian brushturkey, for which higher temperatures during incubation resulted in a higher female-to-male sex ratio. [102] This, however, was later proven to not be the case. These birds do not exhibit temperature-dependent sex

determination, but temperature-dependent sex mortality.[103]





Respiratory and circulatory systems


Birds have one of the most complex respiratory systems of all animal groups. [77] Upon inhalation, 75% of the fresh air bypasses the lungs and flows directly into a posterior air sac which extends from the lungs and connects with air spaces in the bones and fills them with air. The other 25% of the air goes directly into the

lungs. When the bird exhales, the used air flows out of the lungs and the stored fresh air from the posterior

air sac is simultaneously forced into the lungs. Thus, a bird's lungs receive a constant supply of fresh air

during both inhalation and exhalation. [104] Sound production is achieved using the syrinx, a muscular chamber incorporating multiple tympanic membranes which diverges from the lower end of the

trachea;[105] the trachea being elongated in some species, increasing the volume of vocalisations and the

perception of the bird's size.[106]

In birds, the main arteries taking blood away from the heart originate from the right aortic arch (or pharyngeal arch), unlike in the mammals where the left aortic arch forms this part of the aorta. [77] The postcava receives blood from the limbs via the renal portal system. Unlike in mammals, the circulating red

blood cells in birds retain their nucleus. [107]





Heart type and features




The avian circulatory system is driven by a four-chambered, myogenic heart

contained in a fibrous pericardial sac. This pericardial sac is filled with a serous

fluid for lubrication.[108] The heart itself is divided into a right and left half, each with an atrium and ventricle. The atrium and ventricles of each side are separated by atrioventricular valves which prevent back flow from one chamber

to the next during contraction. Being myogenic, the heart's pace is maintained by

pacemaker cells found in the sinoatrial node, located on the right atrium. [109]

The sinoatrial node uses calcium to cause a depolarising signal transduction

pathway from the atrium through right and left atrioventricular bundle which

Didactic model of an

communicates contraction to the ventricles. The avian heart also consists of

avian heart

muscular arches that are made up of thick bundles of muscular layers. Much like

a mammalian heart, the avian heart is composed of endocardial, myocardial and

epicardial layers.[108] The atrium walls tend to be thinner than the ventricle walls, due to the intense ventricular contraction used to pump oxygenated blood throughout the body. Avian hearts are generally

larger than mammalian hearts when compared to body mass. This adaptation allows more blood to be

pumped to meet the high metabolic need associated with flight. [110]





Organisation


Birds have a very efficient system for diffusing oxygen into the blood; birds have a ten times greater surface

area to gas exchange volume than mammals. As a result, birds have more blood in their capillaries per unit of volume of lung than a mammal. [110] The arteries are composed of thick elastic muscles to withstand the

pressure of the ventricular contractions, and become more rigid as they move away from the heart. Blood

moves through the arteries, which undergo vasoconstriction, and into arterioles which act as a transportation system to distribute primarily oxygen as well as nutrients to all tissues of the body. As the arterioles move

away from the heart and into individual organs and tissues they are further divided to increase surface area

and slow blood flow. Blood travels through the arterioles and moves into the capillaries where gas

exchange can occur.[111]

Capillaries are organised into capillary beds in tissues; it is here that blood exchanges oxygen for carbon

dioxide waste. In the capillary beds, blood flow is slowed to allow maximum diffusion of oxygen into the tissues. Once the blood has become deoxygenated, it travels through venules then veins and back to the

heart. Veins, unlike arteries, are thin and rigid as they do not need to withstand extreme pressure. As blood

travels through the venules to the veins a funneling occurs called vasodilation bringing blood back to the heart. [111] Once the blood reaches the heart, it moves first into the right atrium, then the right ventricle to be

pumped through the lungs for further gas exchange of carbon dioxide waste for oxygen. Oxygenated blood

then flows from the lungs through the left atrium to the left ventricle where it is pumped out to the body. [20]





Nervous system


The nervous system is large relative to the bird's size.[77] The most developed part of the brain of birds is the one that controls the flight-related functions, while the cerebellum coordinates movement and the

cerebrum controls behaviour patterns, navigation, mating and nest building. Most birds have a poor sense of

smell[112] with notable exceptions including kiwis, [113] New World vultures[114] and tubenoses. [115] The avian visual system is usually highly developed. Water birds have special flexible lenses, allowing



accommodation for vision in air and water. [77] Some species also have dual fovea. Birds are tetrachromatic,

possessing ultraviolet (UV) sensitive cone cells in the eye as well as green, red and blue ones. [116] They also have double cones, likely to mediate achromatic vision. [117]

Many birds show plumage patterns in ultraviolet that

are invisible to the human eye; some birds whose sexes

appear similar to the naked eye are distinguished by the

presence of ultraviolet reflective patches on their

feathers. Male blue tits have an ultraviolet reflective

The nictitating membrane as it covers the eye of a

crown patch which is displayed in courtship by

masked lapwing

posturing and raising of their nape feathers. [118]

Ultraviolet light is also used in foraging—kestrels have

been shown to search for prey by detecting the UV

reflective urine trail marks left on the ground by rodents. [119] With the exception of pigeons and a few other

species,[120] the eyelids of birds are not used in blinking. Instead the eye is lubricated by the nictitating

membrane, a third eyelid that moves horizontally.[121] The nictitating membrane also covers the eye and acts as a contact lens in many aquatic birds. [77] The bird retina has a fan shaped blood supply system called the pecten. [77]

Eyes of most birds are large, not very round and capable of only limited movement in the orbits,[77]

typically 10–20°. [122] Birds with eyes on the sides of their heads have a wide visual field, while birds with eyes on the front of their heads, such as owls, have binocular vision and can estimate the depth of

field. [122][123] The avian ear lacks external pinnae but is covered by feathers, although in some birds, such as the Asio, Bubo and Otus owls, these feathers form tufts which resemble ears. The inner ear has a cochlea,

but it is not spiral as in mammals.[124]





Defence and intraspecific combat


A few species are able to use chemical defences against predators; some Procellariiformes can eject an unpleasant stomach oil against an aggressor,[125] and some species of pitohuis from New Guinea have a powerful neurotoxin in their skin and feathers. [126]

A lack of field observations limit our knowledge, but intraspecific conflicts are known to sometimes result

in injury or death.[127] The screamers (Anhimidae), some jacanas ( Jacana, Hydrophasianus), the spur-winged goose ( Plectropterus), the torrent duck ( Merganetta) and nine species of lapwing ( Vanellus) use a sharp spur on the wing as a weapon. The steamer ducks ( Tachyeres), geese and swans ( Anserinae), the solitaire ( Pezophaps), sheathbills ( Chionis), some guans ( Crax) and stone curlews ( Burhinus) use a bony knob on the alular metacarpal to punch and hammer opponents.[127] The jacanas Actophilornis and

Irediparra have an expanded, blade-like radius. The extinct Xenicibis was unique in having an elongate forelimb and massive hand which likely functioned in combat or defence as a jointed club or flail. Swans,

for instance, may strike with the bony spurs and bite when defending eggs or young. [127]

Feathers, plumage, and scales

Feathers are a feature characteristic of birds (though also present in some dinosaurs not currently considered to be true birds). They facilitate flight, provide insulation that aids in thermoregulation, and are used in display, camouflage, and signalling. [77] There are several types of feathers, each serving its own set of





purposes. Feathers are epidermal growths attached to the skin and

arise only in specific tracts of skin called pterylae. The distribution

pattern of these feather tracts (pterylosis) is used in taxonomy and

systematics. The arrangement and appearance of feathers on the

body, called plumage, may vary within species by age, social

status,[128] and sex. [129]

Plumage is regularly moulted; the standard plumage of a bird that

has moulted after breeding is known as the " non-breeding"

The disruptively patterned plumage

plumage, or—in the Humphrey–Parkes terminology—"basic"

of the African scops owl allows it to

plumage; breeding plumages or variations of the basic plumage are

blend in with its surroundings.

known under the Humphrey–Parkes system as " alternate"

plumages. [130] Moulting is annual in most species, although some

may have two moults a year, and large birds of prey may moult only once every few years. Moulting

patterns vary across species. In passerines, flight feathers are replaced one at a time with the innermost

primary being the first. When the fifth of sixth primary is replaced, the outermost tertiaries begin to drop.

After the innermost tertiaries are moulted, the secondaries starting from the innermost begin to drop and this proceeds to the outer feathers (centrifugal moult). The greater primary coverts are moulted in synchrony with the primary that they overlap.[131]

A small number of species, such as ducks and geese, lose all of their flight feathers at once, temporarily

becoming flightless.[132] As a general rule, the tail feathers are moulted and replaced starting with the

innermost pair.[131] Centripetal moults of tail feathers are however seen in the Phasianidae. [133] The centrifugal moult is modified in the tail feathers of woodpeckers and treecreepers, in that it begins with the second innermost pair of feathers and finishes with the central pair of feathers so that the bird maintains a

functional climbing tail.[131][134] The general pattern seen in passerines is that the primaries are replaced outward, secondaries inward, and the tail from centre outward. [135] Before nesting, the females of most bird

species gain a bare brood patch by losing feathers close to the belly. The skin there is well supplied with blood vessels and helps the bird in incubation. [136]

Feathers require maintenance and birds preen or groom them daily,

spending an average of around 9% of their daily time on this. [137] The bill

is used to brush away foreign particles and to apply waxy secretions from

the uropygial gland; these secretions protect the feathers' flexibility and act

as an antimicrobial agent, inhibiting the growth of feather-degrading

bacteria. [138] This may be supplemented with the secretions of formic acid

from ants, which birds receive through a behaviour known as anting, to

remove feather parasites. [139]

The scales of birds are composed of the same keratin as beaks, claws, and

spurs. They are found mainly on the toes and metatarsus, but may be found

Red lory preening

further up on the ankle in some birds. Most bird scales do not overlap



significantly, except in the cases of kingfishers and woodpeckers. The scales of birds are thought to be

homologous to those of reptiles and mammals. [140]





Flight


Most birds can fly, which distinguishes them from almost all other

vertebrate classes. Flight is the primary means of locomotion for

most bird species and is used for searching for food and for

escaping from predators. Birds have various adaptations for flight,

including a lightweight skeleton, two large flight muscles, the

pectoralis (which accounts for 15% of the total mass of the bird)

and the supracoracoideus, as well as a modified forelimb (wing)

Restless flycatcher in the

that serves as an aerofoil.[77]

downstroke of flapping flight

Wing shape and size generally determine a bird's flight style and

performance; many birds combine powered, flapping flight with

less energy-intensive soaring flight. About 60 extant bird species are flightless, as were many extinct birds. [141] Flightlessness often arises in birds on isolated islands, most likely due to limited resources and

the absence of mammalian land predators. [142] Flightlessness is almost exclusively correlated with

gigantism due to an island's inherent condition of isolation. [143] Although flightless, penguins use similar musculature and movements to "fly" through the water, as do some flight-capable birds such as auks,

shearwaters and dippers. [144]





Behaviour


Most birds are diurnal, but some birds, such as many species of owls and nightjars, are nocturnal or

crepuscular (active during twilight hours), and many coastal waders feed when the tides are appropriate, by day or night.[145]





Diet and feeding


Birds' diets are varied and often include nectar, fruit, plants, seeds, carrion, and various small animals, including other birds.[77] The digestive system of birds is unique, with a crop for storage and a gizzard that contains swallowed stones for grinding food to compensate for the lack of teeth. [146] Some species such as

pigeons and some psittacine species do not have a gallbladder. [147] Most birds are highly adapted for rapid digestion to aid with flight. [148] Some migratory birds have adapted to use protein stored in many parts of

their bodies, including protein from the intestines, as additional energy during migration. [149]

Birds that employ many strategies to obtain food or feed on a variety of food items are called generalists,

while others that concentrate time and effort on specific food items or have a single strategy to obtain food

are considered specialists. [77] Avian foraging strategies can vary widely by species. Many birds glean for insects, invertebrates, fruit, or seeds. Some hunt insects by suddenly attacking from a branch. Those species

that seek pest insects are considered beneficial 'biological control agents' and their presence encouraged in

biological pest control programmes. [150] Combined, insectivorous birds eat 400–500 million metric tons of arthropods annually.[151]



Nectar feeders such as hummingbirds, sunbirds, lories, and lorikeets

amongst others have specially adapted brushy tongues and in many cases

bills designed to fit co-adapted flowers.[152] Kiwis and shorebirds with long bills probe for invertebrates; shorebirds' varied bill lengths and feeding

methods result in the separation of ecological niches. [77][153] Loons, diving

ducks, penguins and auks pursue their prey underwater, using their wings or feet for propulsion, [68] while aerial predators such as sulids, kingfishers

and terns plunge dive after their prey. Flamingos, three species of prion, and some ducks are filter feeders. [154][155] Geese and dabbling ducks are primarily grazers.[156][157]

Some species, including frigatebirds, gulls,[158] and skuas,[159] engage in

kleptoparasitism, stealing food items from other birds. Kleptoparasitism is

thought to be a supplement to food obtained by hunting, rather than a

significant part of any species' diet; a study of great frigatebirds stealing from masked boobies estimated that the frigatebirds stole at most 40% of

their food and on average stole only 5%.[160] Other birds are scavengers;

some of these, like vultures, are specialised carrion eaters, while others, like

gulls, corvids, or other birds of prey, are opportunists.[161]





Water and drinking


Water is needed by many birds although their mode of excretion and lack of

sweat glands reduces the physiological demands. [162] Some desert birds can obtain their water needs entirely from moisture in their food. Some have

Feeding adaptations in

other adaptations such as allowing their body temperature to rise, saving on

beaks

moisture loss from evaporative cooling or panting.[163] Seabirds can drink

seawater and have salt glands inside the head that eliminate excess salt out

of the nostrils.[164]

Most birds scoop water in their beaks and raise their head to let water run down the throat. Some species,

especially of arid zones, belonging to the pigeon, finch, mousebird, button-quail and bustard families are capable of sucking up water without the need to tilt back their heads. [165] Some desert birds depend on

water sources and sandgrouse are particularly well known for congregating daily at waterholes. Nesting sandgrouse and many plovers carry water to their young by wetting their belly feathers. [166] Some birds

carry water for chicks at the nest in their crop or regurgitate it along with food. The pigeon family,

flamingos and penguins have adaptations to produce a nutritive fluid called crop milk that they provide to their chicks. [167]





Feather care


Feathers, being critical to the survival of a bird, require maintenance. Apart from physical wear and tear,

feathers face the onslaught of fungi, ectoparasitic feather mites and bird lice. [168] The physical condition of feathers are maintained by preening often with the application of secretions from the preen gland. Birds also bathe in water or dust themselves. While some birds dip into shallow water, more aerial species may make

aerial dips into water and arboreal species often make use of dew or rain that collect on leaves. Birds of arid

regions make use of loose soil to dust-bathe. A behaviour termed as anting in which the bird encourages





ants to run through their plumage is also thought to help them reduce the ectoparasite load in feathers. Many

species will spread out their wings and expose them to direct sunlight and this too is thought to help in

reducing fungal and ectoparasitic activity that may lead to feather damage. [169][170]





Migration


Many bird species migrate to take advantage of global differences

of seasonal temperatures, therefore optimising availability of food

sources and breeding habitat. These migrations vary among the

different groups. Many landbirds, shorebirds, and waterbirds

undertake annual long-distance migrations, usually triggered by the

length of daylight as well as weather conditions. These birds are

characterised by a breeding season spent in the temperate or polar

regions and a non-breeding season in the tropical regions or A flock of Canada geese in V

opposite hemisphere. Before migration, birds substantially increase

formation

body fats and reserves and reduce the size of some of their

organs.[171][172]

Migration is highly demanding energetically, particularly as birds need to cross deserts and oceans without

refuelling. Landbirds have a flight range of around 2,500 km (1,600 mi) and shorebirds can fly up to

4,000 km (2,500 mi), [77] although the bar-tailed godwit is capable of non-stop flights of up to 10,200 km (6,300 mi).[173] Some Seabirds undertake long migrations, with the longest annual migrations including those of Arctic terns, which were recorded travelling an average of 70,900 km (44,100 mi) between their

Arctic breeding grounds in Greenland and Iceland and their wintering grounds in Antarctica, with one bird covering 81,600 km (50,700 mi), [174] and sooty shearwaters, which nest in New Zealand and Chile and make annual round trips of 64,000 km (39,800 mi) to their summer feeding grounds in the North Pacific off

Japan, Alaska and California.[175] Other seabirds disperse after breeding, travelling widely but having no set migration route. Albatrosses nesting in the Southern Ocean often undertake circumpolar trips between breeding seasons.[176]

Some bird species undertake shorter migrations, travelling only as

far as is required to avoid bad weather or obtain food. Irruptive

species such as the boreal finches are one such group and can

commonly be found at a location in one year and absent the next.

This type of migration is normally associated with food

availability. [177] Species may also travel shorter distances over part

of their range, with individuals from higher latitudes travelling into

the existing range of conspecifics; others undertake partial

migrations, where only a fraction of the population, usually females

and subdominant males, migrates. [178] Partial migration can form a

large percentage of the migration behaviour of birds in some

The routes of satellite-tagged bar-

regions; in Australia, surveys found that 44% of non-passerine birds

tailed godwits migrating north from

and 32% of passerines were partially migratory.[179]

New Zealand. This species has the

longest known non-stop migration of

Altitudinal migration is a form of short-distance migration in which

any species, up to 10,200 km

(6,300 mi).

birds spend the breeding season at higher altitudes and move to

lower ones during suboptimal conditions. It is most often triggered





by temperature changes and usually occurs when the normal territories also become inhospitable due to lack of food.[180] Some species may also be nomadic, holding no fixed territory and moving according to

weather and food availability. Parrots as a family are overwhelmingly neither migratory nor sedentary but considered to either be dispersive, irruptive, nomadic or undertake small and irregular migrations. [181]

The ability of birds to return to precise locations across vast distances has been known for some time; in an

experiment conducted in the 1950s, a Manx shearwater released in Boston in the United States returned to its colony in Skomer, in Wales within 13 days, a distance of 5,150 km (3,200 mi).[182] Birds navigate during migration using a variety of methods. For diurnal migrants, the sun is used to navigate by day, and a stellar compass is used at night. Birds that use the sun compensate for the changing position of the sun

during the day by the use of an internal clock. [77] Orientation with the stellar compass depends on the position of the constellations surrounding Polaris. [183] These are backed up in some species by their ability to sense the Earth's geomagnetism through specialised photoreceptors. [184]





Communication


Bird song

0:00 / 0:00

Song of the house wren, a common North American songbird

Mimicry

0:00 / 0:00

A tooth-billed bowerbird mimicking a spangled drongo

Drumming

0:00 / 0:00

A woodpecker drumming on wood

Problems playing these files? See media help.

Birds communicate primarily using visual and auditory signals. Signals can be interspecific (between species) and intraspecific (within species).

Birds sometimes use plumage to assess and assert social dominance,[185] to display breeding condition in

sexually selected species, or to make threatening displays, as in the sunbittern' s mimicry of a large predator to ward off hawks and protect young chicks.[186]

Visual communication among birds may also involve ritualised displays, which have developed from non-

signalling actions such as preening, the adjustments of feather position, pecking, or other behaviour. These

displays may signal aggression or submission or may contribute to the formation of pair-bonds. [77] The

most elaborate displays occur during courtship, where "dances" are often formed from complex

combinations of many possible component movements;[187] males' breeding success may depend on the

quality of such displays.[188]

Bird calls and songs, which are produced in the syrinx, are the major means by which birds communicate with sound. This communication can be very complex; some species can operate the two sides of the syrinx independently, allowing the simultaneous production of two different songs.[105] Calls are used for a variety





of purposes, including mate attraction,[77] evaluation of potential

mates, [189] bond formation, the claiming and maintenance of

territories,[77][190] the identification of other individuals (such as

when parents look for chicks in colonies or when mates reunite at

the start of breeding season), [191] and the warning of other birds of

potential predators, sometimes with specific information about the

nature of the threat.[192] Some birds also use mechanical sounds for

auditory communication. The Coenocorypha snipes of New

The startling display of the sunbittern

Zealand drive air through their feathers, [193] woodpeckers drum for mimics a large predator.

long-distance communication,[194] and palm cockatoos use tools to

drum.[195]





Flocking and other associations


While some birds are essentially territorial or live in small family

groups, other birds may form large flocks. The principal benefits of

flocking are safety in numbers and increased foraging efficiency. [77]

Defence against predators is particularly important in closed habitats

like forests, where ambush predation is common and multiple eyes

can provide a valuable early warning system. This has led to the

development of many mixed-species feeding flocks, which are

usually composed of small numbers of many species; these flocks

provide safety in numbers but increase potential competition for

Red-billed queleas, the most

resources.[197] Costs of flocking include bullying of socially

numerous species of wild bird,[196]

subordinate birds by more dominant birds and the reduction of

form enormous flocks – sometimes

tens of thousands strong.

feeding efficiency in certain cases. [198] Some species have a mixed

system with breeding pairs maintaining territories, while unmated or

young birds live in flocks where they secure mates prior to finding

territories.[199]

Birds sometimes also form associations with non-avian species. Plunge-diving seabirds associate with

dolphins and tuna, which push shoaling fish towards the surface. [200] Some species of hornbills have a

mutualistic relationship with dwarf mongooses, in which they forage together and warn each other of nearby birds of prey and other predators.[201]





Resting and roosting


The high metabolic rates of birds during the active part of the day is supplemented by rest at other times.

Sleeping birds often use a type of sleep known as vigilant sleep, where periods of rest are interspersed with quick eye-opening "peeks", allowing them to be sensitive to disturbances and enable rapid escape from

threats. [202] Swifts are believed to be able to sleep in flight and radar observations suggest that they orient themselves to face the wind in their roosting flight.[203] It has been suggested that there may be certain

kinds of sleep which are possible even when in flight. [204]

Some birds have also demonstrated the capacity to fall into slow-wave sleep one hemisphere of the brain at a time. The birds tend to exercise this ability depending upon its position relative to the outside of the flock.

This may allow the eye opposite the sleeping hemisphere to remain vigilant for predators by viewing the





outer margins of the flock. This adaptation is also known from

marine mammals.[205] Communal roosting is common because it lowers the loss of body heat and decreases the risks associated with

predators.[206] Roosting sites are often chosen with regard to

thermoregulation and safety. [207] Unusual mobile roost sites include

large herbivores on the African savanna that are used by

oxpeckers. [208]

Many sleeping birds bend their heads over their backs and tuck

Many birds, like this American

their bills in their back feathers, although others place their beaks

flamingo, tuck their head into their

among their breast feathers. Many birds rest on one leg, while some

back when sleeping.

may pull up their legs into their feathers, especially in cold weather.

Perching birds have a tendon-locking mechanism that helps them

hold on to the perch when they are asleep. Many ground birds, such as quails and pheasants, roost in trees.

A few parrots of the genus Loriculus roost hanging upside down.[209] Some hummingbirds go into a nightly state of torpor accompanied with a reduction of their metabolic rates. [210] This physiological

adaptation shows in nearly a hundred other species, including owlet-nightjars, nightjars, and

woodswallows. One species, the common poorwill, even enters a state of hibernation. [211] Birds do not have sweat glands, but can lose water directly through the skin, and they may cool themselves by moving to

shade, standing in water, panting, increasing their surface area, fluttering their throat or using special

behaviours like urohidrosis to cool themselves.[212][213]

Breeding





Social systems


Ninety-five per cent of bird species are socially monogamous.

These species pair for at least the length of the breeding season or—

in some cases—for several years or until the death of one mate. [215]

Monogamy allows for both paternal care and biparental care, which is especially important for species in which care from both the

female and the male parent is required in order to successfully rear a

brood.[216] Among many socially monogamous species, extra-pair

copulation (infidelity) is common. [217] Such behaviour typically occurs between dominant males and females paired with

subordinate males, but may also be the result of forced copulation in

ducks and other anatids. [218]

For females, possible benefits of extra-pair copulation include

getting better genes for her offspring and insuring against the

possibility of infertility in her mate. [219] Males of species that

Like others of its family, the male

engage in extra-pair copulations will closely guard their mates to

Raggiana bird-of-paradise has

ensure the parentage of the offspring that they raise. [220]

elaborate breeding plumage used to

impress females. [214]

Other mating systems, including polygyny, polyandry, polygamy,

polygynandry, and promiscuity, also occur. [77] Polygamous breeding systems arise when females are able to raise broods without the help of males. [77] Mating systems



vary across bird families[221] but variations within species are thought to be driven by environmental

conditions. [222] A unique system is the formation of trios where a third individual is allowed by a breeding

pair temporarily into the territory to assist with brood raising thereby leading to higher fitness. [223][190]

Breeding usually involves some form of courtship display, typically performed by the male. [224] Most

displays are rather simple and involve some type of song. Some displays, however, are quite elaborate.

Depending on the species, these may include wing or tail drumming, dancing, aerial flights, or communal

lekking. Females are generally the ones that drive partner selection,[225] although in the polyandrous

phalaropes, this is reversed: plainer males choose brightly coloured females. [226] Courtship feeding, billing

and allopreening are commonly performed between partners, generally after the birds have paired and mated. [227]

Homosexual behaviour has been observed in males or females in numerous species of birds, including copulation, pair-bonding, and joint parenting of chicks. [228] Over 130 avian species around the world

engage in sexual interactions between the same sex or homosexual behaviours. "Same-sex courtship

activities may involve elaborate displays, synchronised dances, gift-giving ceremonies, or behaviours at

specific display areas including bowers, arenas, or leks." [229]

Territories, nesting and incubation

Many birds actively defend a territory from others of the same species during the breeding season;

maintenance of territories protects the food source for their chicks. Species that are unable to defend feeding

territories, such as seabirds and swifts, often breed in colonies instead; this is thought to offer protection from predators. Colonial breeders defend small nesting sites, and competition between and within species

for nesting sites can be intense. [230]

All birds lay amniotic eggs with hard shells made mostly of calcium carbonate. [77] Hole and burrow nesting species tend to lay white or pale eggs, while open nesters lay camouflaged eggs. There are many exceptions to this pattern, however; the ground-nesting nightjars have pale eggs, and camouflage is instead provided by their plumage. Species that are victims of brood parasites have varying egg colours to improve the chances of spotting a parasite's egg, which forces female parasites to match their eggs to those of their hosts.[231]

Bird eggs are usually laid in a nest. Most species create somewhat

elaborate nests, which can be cups, domes, plates, mounds, or

burrows. [232] Some bird nests can be a simple scrape, with minimal

or no lining; most seabird and wader nests are no more than a

scrape on the ground. Most birds build nests in sheltered, hidden

areas to avoid predation, but large or colonial birds—which are

more capable of defence—may build more open nests. During nest

construction, some species seek out plant matter from plants with

Male golden-backed weavers

parasite-reducing toxins to improve chick survival, [233] and feathers

construct elaborate suspended nests

out of grass.

are often used for nest insulation. [232] Some bird species have no

nests; the cliff-nesting common guillemot lays its eggs on bare rock,

and male emperor penguins keep eggs between their body and feet.

The absence of nests is especially prevalent in open habitat ground-nesting species where any addition of

nest material would make the nest more conspicuous. Many ground nesting birds lay a clutch of eggs that

hatch synchronously, with precocial chicks led away from the nests (nidifugous) by their parents soon after hatching. [234]



Incubation, which regulates temperature for chick development,

usually begins after the last egg has been laid. [77] In monogamous

species incubation duties are often shared, whereas in polygamous

species one parent is wholly responsible for incubation. Warmth

from parents passes to the eggs through brood patches, areas of bare

skin on the abdomen or breast of the incubating birds. Incubation

can be an energetically demanding process; adult albatrosses, for

instance, lose as much as 83 grams (2.9 oz) of body weight per day

of incubation. [235] The warmth for the incubation of the eggs of

Nest of an eastern phoebe that has

megapodes comes from the sun, decaying vegetation or volcanic

been parasitised by a brown-headed

sources. [236] Incubation periods range from 10 days (in

cowbird

woodpeckers, cuckoos and passerine birds) to over 80 days (in albatrosses and kiwis).[77]

The diversity of characteristics of birds is great, sometimes even in closely related species. Several avian

characteristics are compared in the table below.[237][238]

Species

Adult weight

Incubation

Clutches





Clutch size


(grams)

(days)

(per year)

Ruby-throated hummingbird ( Archilochus colubris)

3

13

2.0

2

House sparrow ( Passer domesticus)

25

11

4.5

5

Greater roadrunner ( Geococcyx californianus)

376

20

1.5

4

Turkey vulture ( Cathartes aura)

2,200

39

1.0

2

Laysan albatross ( Phoebastria immutabilis)

3,150

64

1.0

1

Magellanic penguin ( Spheniscus magellanicus)

4,000

40

1.0

1

Golden eagle ( Aquila chrysaetos)

4,800

40

1.0

2

Wild turkey ( Meleagris gallopavo)

6,050

28

1.0

11





Parental care and fledging


At the time of their hatching, chicks range in development from helpless to independent, depending on their

species. Helpless chicks are termed altricial, and tend to be born small, blind, immobile and naked; chicks that are mobile and feathered upon hatching are termed precocial. Altricial chicks need help

thermoregulating and must be brooded for longer than precocial chicks. The young of many bird species do not precisely fit into either the precocial or altricial category, having some aspects of each and thus fall

somewhere on an "altricial-precocial spectrum". [239] Chicks at neither extreme but favouring one or the

other may be termed semi-precocial[240] or semi-altricial. [241]

The length and nature of parental care varies widely amongst different orders and species. At one extreme,

parental care in megapodes ends at hatching; the newly hatched chick digs itself out of the nest mound without parental assistance and can fend for itself immediately.[242] At the other extreme, many seabirds

have extended periods of parental care, the longest being that of the great frigatebird, whose chicks take up to six months to fledge and are fed by the parents for up to an additional 14 months.[243] The chick guard stage describes the period of breeding during which one of the adult birds is permanently present at the nest

after chicks have hatched. The main purpose of the guard stage is to aid offspring to thermoregulate and

protect them from predation. [244]





In some species, both

parents care for nestlings

and fledglings; in others,

such

care

is

the

responsibility of only one

sex. In some species, other

members of the same

species—usually

close

A female calliope hummingbird

Altricial chicks of a white-breasted

relatives of the breeding

feeding fully grown chicks

woodswallow

pair, such as offspring from

previous broods—will help

with the raising of the young.[245] Such alloparenting is particularly common among the Corvida, which includes such birds as the true crows, Australian magpie and fairy-wrens, [246] but has been observed in species as different as the rifleman and red kite. Among most groups of animals, male parental care is rare.

In birds, however, it is quite common—more so than in any other vertebrate class. [77] Although territory

and nest site defence, incubation, and chick feeding are often shared tasks, there is sometimes a division of

labour in which one mate undertakes all or most of a particular duty. [247]

The point at which chicks fledge varies dramatically. The chicks of the Synthliboramphus murrelets, like the

ancient murrelet, leave the nest the night after they hatch, following their parents out to sea, where they are raised away from terrestrial predators. [248] Some other species, such as ducks, move their chicks away from

the nest at an early age. In most species, chicks leave the nest just before, or soon after, they are able to fly.

The amount of parental care after fledging varies; albatross chicks leave the nest on their own and receive

no further help, while other species continue some supplementary feeding after fledging. [249] Chicks may

also follow their parents during their first migration. [250]





Brood parasites


Brood parasitism, in which an egg-layer leaves her eggs with another

individual's brood, is more common among birds than any other type of

organism.[251] After a parasitic bird lays her eggs in another bird's nest, they

are often accepted and raised by the host at the expense of the host's own

brood. Brood parasites may be either obligate brood parasites, which must

lay their eggs in the nests of other species because they are incapable of

raising their own young, or non-obligate brood parasites, which sometimes

lay eggs in the nests of conspecifics to increase their reproductive output

even though they could have raised their own young. [252] One hundred

bird species, including honeyguides, icterids, and ducks, are obligate parasites, though the most famous are the cuckoos. [251] Some brood

parasites are adapted to hatch before their host's young, which allows them

Reed warbler raising a

to destroy the host's eggs by pushing them out of the nest or to kill the host's

common cuckoo, a brood

chicks; this ensures that all food brought to the nest will be fed to the

parasite

parasitic chicks. [253]





Sexual selection




Birds have evolved a variety of mating behaviours, with the peacock tail being perhaps the most famous

example of sexual selection and the Fisherian runaway.

Commonly occurring sexual dimorphisms such as size

and colour differences are energetically costly

attributes

that

signal

competitive

breeding

situations.[254] Many types of avian sexual selection

have been identified; intersexual selection, also known

as female choice; and intrasexual competition, where

The peacock tail in flight, the classic example of a

individuals of the more abundant sex compete with

Fisherian runaway

each other for the privilege to mate. Sexually selected

traits often evolve to become more pronounced in

competitive breeding situations until the trait begins to limit the individual's fitness. Conflicts between an

individual fitness and signalling adaptations ensure that sexually selected ornaments such as plumage

colouration and courtship behaviour are "honest" traits. Signals must be costly to ensure that only good-quality individuals can present these exaggerated sexual ornaments and behaviours. [255]





Inbreeding depression


Inbreeding causes early death (inbreeding depression) in the zebra finch Taeniopygia guttata. [256] Embryo survival (that is, hatching success of fertile eggs) was significantly lower for sib-sib mating pairs than for unrelated pairs.[257]

Darwin's finch Geospiza scandens experiences inbreeding depression (reduced survival of offspring) and the magnitude of this effect is influenced by environmental conditions such as low food availability.[258]





Inbreeding avoidance


Incestuous matings by the purple-crowned fairy wren Malurus coronatus result in severe fitness costs due to

inbreeding depression (greater than 30% reduction in hatchability of eggs). [259] Females paired with related males may undertake extra pair matings (see Promiscuity#Other animals for 90% frequency in avian species) that can reduce the negative effects of inbreeding. However, there are ecological and demographic

constraints on extra pair matings. Nevertheless, 43% of broods produced by incestuously paired females

contained extra pair young. [259]

Inbreeding depression occurs in the great tit ( Parus major) when the offspring produced as a result of a mating between close relatives show reduced fitness. In natural populations of Parus major, inbreeding is

avoided by dispersal of individuals from their birthplace, which reduces the chance of mating with a close

relative. [260]

Southern pied babblers Turdoides bicolor appear to avoid inbreeding in two ways. The first is through dispersal, and the second is by avoiding familiar group members as mates.[261]

Cooperative breeding in birds typically occurs when offspring, usually males, delay dispersal from their natal group in order to remain with the family to help rear younger kin. [262] Female offspring rarely stay at

home, dispersing over distances that allow them to breed independently, or to join unrelated groups. In



general, inbreeding is avoided because it leads to a reduction in progeny fitness (inbreeding depression) due largely to the homozygous expression of deleterious recessive alleles.[263] Cross-fertilisation between unrelated individuals ordinarily leads to the masking of deleterious recessive alleles in progeny. [264][265]





Ecology


Birds occupy a wide range of ecological positions.[196] While some

birds are generalists, others are highly specialised in their habitat or

food requirements. Even within a single habitat, such as a forest, the

niches occupied by different species of birds vary, with some

species feeding in the forest canopy, others beneath the canopy, and

still others on the forest floor. Forest birds may be insectivores,

frugivores, or nectarivores. Aquatic birds generally feed by fishing, plant eating, and piracy or kleptoparasitism. Many grassland birds

Gran Canaria blue chaffinch, an

are granivores. Birds of prey specialise in hunting mammals or

example of a bird highly specialised

other birds, while vultures are specialised scavengers. Birds are also

in its habitat, in this case in the

preyed upon by a range of mammals including a few avivorous

Canarian pine forests

bats. [266] A wide range of endo- and ectoparasites depend on birds

and some parasites that are transmitted from parent to young have

co-evolved and show host-specificity. [267]

Some nectar-feeding birds are important pollinators, and many frugivores play a key role in seed

dispersal. [268] Plants and pollinating birds often coevolve, [269] and in some cases a flower's primary pollinator is the only species capable of reaching its nectar.[270]

Birds are often important to island ecology. Birds have frequently reached islands that mammals have not;

on those islands, birds may fulfil ecological roles typically played by larger animals. For example, in New

Zealand nine species of moa were important browsers, as are the kererū and kokako today.[268] Today the plants of New Zealand retain the defensive adaptations evolved to protect them from the extinct moa. [271]

Many birds act as ecosystem engineers through the construction of nests, which provide important microhabitats and food for hundreds of species of invertebrates. [272][273] Nesting seabirds may affect the ecology of islands and surrounding seas, principally through the concentration of large quantities of guano,

which may enrich the local soil[274] and the surrounding seas. [275]

A wide variety of avian ecology field methods, including counts, nest monitoring, and capturing and marking, are used for researching avian ecology.[276]





Relationship with humans


Since birds are highly visible and common animals, humans have had a relationship with them since the

dawn of man.[277] Sometimes, these relationships are mutualistic, like the cooperative honey-gathering among honeyguides and African peoples such as the Borana.[278] Other times, they may be commensal, as when species such as the house sparrow[279] have benefited from human activities. Several species have reconciled to habits of farmers who practice traditional farming. Examples include the Sarus Crane that begins nesting in India when farmers flood the fields in anticipation of rains, [280] and the Woolly-necked

Storks that have taken to nesting on a short tree grown for agroforestry beside fields and canals. [281]

Several bird species have become commercially significant agricultural pests,[282] and some pose an





aviation hazard.[283] Human activities can also be detrimental, and

have threatened numerous bird species with extinction (hunting,

avian lead poisoning, pesticides, roadkill, wind turbine kills[284]

and predation by pet cats and dogs are common causes of death for birds).[285]

Birds can act as vectors for spreading diseases such as psittacosis,

salmonellosis,

campylobacteriosis,

mycobacteriosis

(avian

tuberculosis), avian influenza (bird flu), giardiasis, and

Industrial farming of chickens

cryptosporidiosis over long distances. Some of these are zoonotic

diseases that can also be transmitted to humans. [286]





Economic importance


Domesticated birds raised for meat and eggs, called poultry, are the largest

source of animal protein eaten by humans; in 2003, 76 million tons of

poultry and 61 million tons of eggs were produced worldwide. [287]

Chickens account for much of human poultry consumption, though

domesticated turkeys, ducks, and geese are also relatively common. [288]

Many species of birds are also hunted for meat. Bird hunting is primarily a

recreational activity except in extremely undeveloped areas. The most

important birds hunted in North and South America are waterfowl; other

widely hunted birds include pheasants, wild turkeys, quail, doves, partridge,

grouse, snipe, and woodcock. Muttonbirding is also popular in Australia and New Zealand. [289] Although some hunting, such as that of

muttonbirds, may be sustainable, hunting has led to the extinction or

The use of cormorants by

endangerment of dozens of species.[290]

Asian fishermen is in steep

decline but survives in some

Other commercially valuable products from birds include feathers

areas as a tourist attraction.

(especially the down of geese and ducks), which are used as insulation in

clothing and bedding, and seabird faeces (guano), which is a valuable

source of phosphorus and nitrogen. The War of the Pacific, sometimes

called the Guano War, was fought in part over the control of guano deposits.[291]

Birds have been domesticated by humans both as pets and for practical purposes. Colourful birds, such as

parrots and mynas, are bred in captivity or kept as pets, a practice that has led to the illegal trafficking of some endangered species. [292] Falcons and cormorants have long been used for hunting and fishing,

respectively. Messenger pigeons, used since at least 1 AD, remained important as recently as World War II.

Today, such activities are more common either as hobbies, for entertainment and tourism,[293]

Amateur bird enthusiasts (called birdwatchers, twitchers or, more commonly, birders) number in the millions.[294] Many homeowners erect bird feeders near their homes to attract various species. Bird feeding

has grown into a multimillion-dollar industry; for example, an estimated 75% of households in Britain

provide food for birds at some point during the winter. [295]





In religion and mythology





Birds play prominent and diverse roles in religion and mythology. In

religion, birds may serve as either messengers or priests and leaders for a

deity, such as in the Cult of Makemake, in which the Tangata manu of

Easter Island served as chiefs[296] or as attendants, as in the case of Hugin

and Munin, the two common ravens who whispered news into the ears of the Norse god Odin. In several civilisations of ancient Italy, particularly

Etruscan and Roman religion, priests were involved in augury, or interpreting the words of birds while the "auspex" (from which the word

"auspicious" is derived) watched their activities to foretell events. [297]

They may also serve as religious symbols, as when Jonah (Hebrew: הנוי,

dove) embodied the fright, passivity, mourning, and beauty traditionally

associated with doves. [298] Birds have themselves been deified, as in the

case of the common peacock, which is perceived as Mother Earth by the

The 3 of Birds by the Master

of the Playing Cards, 15th-

people of southern India. [299] In the ancient world, doves were used as

century Germany

symbols of the Mesopotamian goddess Inanna (later known as Ishtar), [300][301] the Canaanite mother goddess Asherah, [300][301][302] and the Greek goddess Aphrodite. [300][301][303][304][305] In ancient Greece, Athena, the goddess of wisdom and patron deity of the city of Athens, had a little owl as her symbol. [306][307][308] In religious images preserved from the Inca and Tiwanaku empires, birds are depicted in the process of transgressing

boundaries between earthly and underground spiritual realms.[309] Indigenous peoples of the central Andes

maintain legends of birds passing to and from metaphysical worlds.[309]





In culture and folklore


Birds have featured in culture and art since prehistoric times, when

they were represented in early cave painting[310] and carvings. [311]

Some birds have been perceived as monsters, including the

mythological Roc and the Māori's legendary Pouākai, a giant bird capable of snatching humans. [312] Birds were later used as symbols

of power, as in the magnificent Peacock Throne of the Mughal and Painted tiles with design of birds

Persian emperors. [313] With the advent of scientific interest in birds, from Qajar dynasty

many paintings of birds were commissioned for books.[314][315]

Among the most famous of these bird artists was John James

Audubon, whose paintings of North American birds were a great commercial success in Europe and who later lent his name to the National Audubon Society. [316] Birds are also important figures in poetry; for example, Homer incorporated nightingales into his Odyssey, and Catullus used a sparrow as an erotic symbol in his Catullus 2.[317] The relationship between an albatross and a sailor is the central theme of

Samuel Taylor Coleridge's The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, which led to the use of the term as a metaphor

for a 'burden' .[318] Other English metaphors derive from birds; vulture funds and vulture investors, for instance, take their name from the scavenging vulture. [319] Aircraft, particularly military aircraft, are

frequently named after birds. The predatory nature of raptors make them popular choices for fighter aircraft

such as the F-16 Fighting Falcon and the Harrier Jump Jet, while the names of seabirds may be chosen for aircraft primarily used by naval forces such as the HU-16 Albatross and the V-22 Osprey. [320]





Perceptions of bird species vary across cultures. Owls are

associated with bad luck, witchcraft, and death in parts of

Africa, [321] but are regarded as wise across much of Europe. [322]

Hoopoes were considered sacred in Ancient Egypt and symbols of virtue in Persia, but were thought of as thieves across much of

Europe and harbingers of war in Scandinavia. [323] In heraldry,

The flag of Dominica prominently

birds, especially eagles, often appear in coats of arms[324] In features the Sisserou Parrot, its

vexillology, birds are a popular choice on flags. Birds feature in the national bird.

flag designs of 17 countries and numerous subnational entities and

territories.[325] Birds are used by nations to symbolise a country's

identity and heritage, with 91 countries officially recognising a national bird. Birds of prey are highly represented, though some nations have chosen other species of birds with parrots being popular among

smaller, tropical nations.[326]





In music


In music, birdsong has influenced composers and musicians in several ways: they can be inspired by birdsong; they can intentionally imitate bird song in a composition, as Vivaldi, Messiaen, and Beethoven

did, along with many later composers; they can incorporate recordings of birds into their works, as Ottorino

Respighi first did; or like Beatrice Harrison and David Rothenberg, they can duet with birds. [327][328][329][330]

A 2023 archaeological excavation of a 10000-year-old site in Israel yielded hollow wing bones of coots and

ducks with perforations made on the side that are thought to have allowed them to be used as flutes or

whistles possibly used by Natufian people to lure birds of prey. [331]





Threats and conservation


Human activities have caused population decreases or extinction in many

bird species. Over a hundred bird species have gone extinct in historical

times, [332] although the most dramatic human-caused avian extinctions,

eradicating an estimated 750–1800 species, occurred during the human

colonisation of Melanesian, Polynesian, and Micronesian islands. [333]

Many bird populations are declining worldwide, with 1,227 species listed

as threatened by BirdLife International and the IUCN in 2009. [334][335]

There have been long term declines in North American bird populations,

with an estimated loss of 2.9 billion breeding adults, about 30% of the total,

since 1970.[336][337]

The most commonly cited human threat to birds is habitat loss. [338] Other The California condor once

numbered only 22 birds, but

threats include overhunting, accidental mortality due to collisions with

conservation measures

buildings or vehicles, long-line fishing bycatch,[339] pollution (including oil

have raised that to over 500

spills and pesticide use), [340] competition and predation from nonnative today.

invasive species, [341] and climate change.





Governments and conservation groups work to protect birds, either by passing laws that preserve and

restore bird habitat or by establishing captive populations for reintroductions. Such projects have produced some successes; one study estimated that conservation efforts saved 16 species of bird that would otherwise

have gone extinct between 1994 and 2004, including the California condor and Norfolk parakeet. [342]

Human activities have allowed the expansion of a few temperate area species, such as the barn swallow and

European starling. In the tropics and sub-tropics, relatively more species are expanding due to human activities, particularly due to the spread of crops such as rice whose expansion in south Asia has benefitted

at least 64 bird species, though may have harmed many more species. [343]





See also


Avian sleep

Biodiversity loss

Climate change and birds

Glossary of bird terms

List of individual birds

Ornithology

List of bird genera





References


1. Field, Daniel J.; Benito, Juan; Chen, Albert; Jagt, John W. M.; Ksepka, Daniel T. (March

2020). "Late Cretaceous neornithine from Europe illuminates the origins of crown birds" (http

s://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/303639). Nature. 579 (7799): 397–401.

Bibcode:2020Natur.579..397F (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020Natur.579..397F).

doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2096-0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41586-020-2096-0).

ISSN 0028-0836 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0028-0836). PMID 32188952 (https://pubme

d.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32188952). S2CID 212937591 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:

212937591).

2. De Pietri, Vanesa L.; Scofield, R. Paul; Zelenkov, Nikita; Boles, Walter E.; Worthy, Trevor H.

(February 2016). "The unexpected survival of an ancient lineage of anseriform birds into the

Neogene of Australia: the youngest record of Presbyornithidae" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go

v/pmc/articles/PMC4785986). Royal Society Open Science. 3 (2): 150635.

Bibcode:2016RSOS....350635D (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016RSOS....350635D).

doi:10.1098/rsos.150635 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frsos.150635). PMC 4785986 (https://w

ww.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4785986). PMID 26998335 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.

nih.gov/26998335).

3. Yonezawa, T.; et al. (2017). "Phylogenomics and Morphology of Extinct Paleognaths Reveal

the Origin and Evolution of the Ratites" (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cub.2016.10.029).

Current Biology. 27 (1): 68–77. Bibcode:2017CBio...27...68Y (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/a

bs/2017CBio...27...68Y). doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.10.029 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cub.20

16.10.029). PMID 27989673 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27989673).





4. Kuhl, H.; Frankl-Vilches, C.; Bakker, A.; Mayr, G.; Nikolaus, G.; Boerno, S. T.; Klages, S.;

Timmermann, B.; Gahr, M. (2020). "An unbiased molecular approach using 3'UTRs resolves

the avian family-level tree of life" (https://academic.oup.com/mbe/advance-article/doi/10.109

3/molbev/msaa191/5891114). Molecular Biology and Evolution. 38 (1): 108–127.

doi:10.1093/molbev/msaa191 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fmolbev%2Fmsaa191).

hdl:21.11116/0000-0007-B72A-C (https://hdl.handle.net/21.11116%2F0000-0007-B72A-C).

PMC 7783168 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7783168). PMID 32781465 (h

ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32781465).

5. Crouch, N. M. A. (2022). "Interpreting the fossil record and the origination of birds". bioRxiv.

doi:10.1101/2022.05.19.492716 (https://doi.org/10.1101%2F2022.05.19.492716).

S2CID 249047881 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249047881).

6. Brands, Sheila (14 August 2008). "Systema Naturae 2000 / Classification, Class Aves" (htt

p://taxonomicon.taxonomy.nl/TaxonTree.aspx?id=80129&tree=0.1). Project: The Taxonomicon. Retrieved 11 June 2012.

7. Claramunt, S.; Cracraft, J. (2015). "A new time tree reveals Earth history's imprint on the

evolution of modern birds" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4730849). Sci Adv. 1 (11): e1501005. Bibcode:2015SciA....1E1005C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/20

15SciA....1E1005C). doi:10.1126/sciadv.1501005 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fsciadv.150100

5). PMC 4730849 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4730849).

PMID 26824065 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26824065).

8. del Hoyo, Josep; Andy Elliott; Jordi Sargatal (1992). Handbook of Birds of the World, Volume

1: Ostrich to Ducks. Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-10-5.

9. Linnaeus, Carolus (1758). Systema naturae per regna tria naturae, secundum classes,

ordines, genera, species, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis. Tomus I. Editio

decima, reformata (in Latin). Holmiae. (Laurentii Salvii). p. 824.

10. Livezey, Bradley C.; Zusi, RL (January 2007). "Higher-order phylogeny of modern birds

(Theropoda, Aves: Neornithes) based on comparative anatomy. II. Analysis and discussion"

(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2517308). Zoological Journal of the Linnean

Society. 149 (1): 1–95. doi:10.1111/j.1096-3642.2006.00293.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1

096-3642.2006.00293.x). PMC 2517308 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC251

7308). PMID 18784798 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18784798).

11. Padian, Kevin; Philip J. Currie (1997). "Bird Origins". Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs. San Diego: Academic Press. pp. 41–96. ISBN 0-12-226810-5.

12. Gauthier, Jacques (1986). "Saurischian monophyly and the origin of birds". In Padian, Kevin

(ed.). The Origin of Birds and the Evolution of Flight (https://biostor.org/reference/110202).

Memoirs of the California Academy of Science. Vol. 8. San Francisco, CA: Published by

California Academy of Sciences. pp. 1–55. ISBN 0-940228-14-9.

13. Gauthier, J.; de Queiroz, K. (2001). "Feathered dinosaurs, flying dinosaurs, crown dinosaurs,

and the name Aves". In Gauthier, J. A.; Gall, L. F. (eds.). New perspectives on the origin and

early evolution of birds: proceedings of the International Symposium in Honor of John H.

Ostrom. New Haven, CT: Peabody Museum of Natural History, Yale University. pp. 7–41.

14. Godefroit, Pascal; Andrea Cau; Hu Dong-Yu; François Escuillié; Wu Wenhao; Gareth Dyke (2013). "A Jurassic avialan dinosaur from China resolves the early phylogenetic history of

birds". Nature. 498 (7454): 359–362. Bibcode:2013Natur.498..359G (https://ui.adsabs.harvar

d.edu/abs/2013Natur.498..359G). doi:10.1038/nature12168 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnatur

e12168). PMID 23719374 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23719374). S2CID 4364892 (htt

ps://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4364892).





15. Cau, Andrea (2018). "The assembly of the avian body plan: a 160-million-year long process"

(http://paleoitalia.org/media/u/archives/01_Cau_2018_BSPI_571.pdf) (PDF). Bollettino della Società Paleontologica Italiana. Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://p

aleoitalia.org/media/u/archives/01_Cau_2018_BSPI_571.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9

October 2022.

16. Weishampel, David B.; Dodson, Peter; Osmólska, Halszka, eds. (2004). The Dinosauria

(Second ed.). University of California Press. pp. 861 pp.

17. Senter, P. (2007). "A new look at the phylogeny of Coelurosauria (Dinosauria: Theropoda)".

Journal of Systematic Palaeontology. 5 (4): 429–463. Bibcode:2007JSPal...5..429S (https://u

i.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007JSPal...5..429S). doi:10.1017/S1477201907002143 (https://d

oi.org/10.1017%2FS1477201907002143). S2CID 83726237 (https://api.semanticscholar.or

g/CorpusID:83726237).

18. Maryańska, Teresa; Osmólska, Halszka; Wolsan, Mieczysław (2002). "Avialan status for

Oviraptorosauria". Acta Palaeontologica Polonica. S2CID 55462557 (https://api.semanticsch

olar.org/CorpusID:55462557).

19. Gauthier, J. (1986). "Saurischian monophyly and the origin of birds". In Padian, K. (ed.). The

origin of birds and the evolution of flight. San Francisco, California: Mem. Calif. Acad. Sci.

pp. 1–55.

20. Lee, Michael S. Y.; Spencer, Patrick S. (1 January 1997). "CHAPTER 3 – Crown-Clades,

Key Characters and Taxonomic Stability: When Is an Amniote not and Amniote?" (http://www.

sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780126764604500044). In Sumida, Stuart S.; Martin, Karen L. M. (eds.). Amniote Origins. Academic Press. pp. 61–84. ISBN 978-0-12-676460-4.

Retrieved 14 May 2020.

21. Cau, Andrea; Brougham, Tom; Naish, Darren (2015). "The phylogenetic affinities of the

bizarre Late Cretaceous Romanian theropod Balaur bondoc(Dinosauria, Maniraptora):

Dromaeosaurid or flightless bird?" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4476167).

PeerJ. 3: e1032. doi:10.7717/peerj.1032 (https://doi.org/10.7717%2Fpeerj.1032).

PMC 4476167 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4476167). PMID 26157616 (h

ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26157616).

22. Plotnick, Roy E.; Theodor, Jessica M.; Holtz, Thomas R. (24 September 2015). "Jurassic

Pork: What Could a Jewish Time Traveler Eat?" (https://doi.org/10.1186%2Fs12052-015-004

7-2). Evolution: Education and Outreach. 8 (1): 17. doi:10.1186/s12052-015-0047-2 (https://d

oi.org/10.1186%2Fs12052-015-0047-2). hdl:1903/27622 (https://hdl.handle.net/1903%2F27

622). ISSN 1936-6434 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/1936-6434). S2CID 16195453 (https://

api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16195453).

23. Prum, Richard O. (19 December 2008). "Who's Your Daddy?" (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fsci

ence.1168808). Science. 322 (5909): 1799–1800. doi:10.1126/science.1168808 (https://doi.

org/10.1126%2Fscience.1168808). PMID 19095929 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19095

929). S2CID 206517571 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:206517571).

24. Paul, Gregory S. (2002). "Looking for the True Bird Ancestor". Dinosaurs of the Air: The Evolution and Loss of Flight in Dinosaurs and Birds. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University

Press. pp. 171–224. ISBN 0-8018-6763-0.

25. Norell, Mark; Mick Ellison (2005). Unearthing the Dragon: The Great Feathered Dinosaur

Discovery (https://archive.org/details/unearthingdragon00mark). New York: Pi Press. ISBN 0-

13-186266-9.

26. Borenstein, Seth (31 July 2014). "Study traces dinosaur evolution into early birds" (https://we

b.archive.org/web/20140808042331/http://apnews.excite.com/article/20140731/us-sci-shrink

ing-dinosaurs-a5c053f221.html). Associated Press. Archived from the original (http://apnews.

excite.com/article/20140731/us-sci-shrinking-dinosaurs-a5c053f221.html) on 8 August 2014.

Retrieved 3 August 2014.





27. Lee, Michael S. Y.; Cau, Andrea; Naish, Darren; Dyke, Gareth J. (1 August 2014). "Sustained

miniaturization and anatomical innovation in the dinosaurian ancestors of birds". Science.

345 (6196): 562–566. Bibcode:2014Sci...345..562L (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014

Sci...345..562L). doi:10.1126/science.1252243 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.125224

3). PMID 25082702 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25082702). S2CID 37866029 (https://a

pi.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:37866029).

28. Li, Q.; Gao, K.-Q.; Vinther, J.; Shawkey, M. D.; Clarke, J. A.; d'Alba, L.; Meng, Q.; Briggs, D. E.

G. & Prum, R. O. (2010). "Plumage color patterns of an extinct dinosaur" (http://doc.rero.ch/re

cord/210394/files/PAL_E4402.pdf) (PDF). Science. 327 (5971): 1369–1372.

Bibcode:2010Sci...327.1369L (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010Sci...327.1369L).

doi:10.1126/science.1186290 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1186290).

PMID 20133521 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20133521). S2CID 206525132 (https://api.

semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:206525132). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221

009/http://doc.rero.ch/record/210394/files/PAL_E4402.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9

October 2022.

29. Xing Xu; Hailu You; Kai Du; Fenglu Han (28 July 2011). "An Archaeopteryx-like theropod

from China and the origin of Avialae". Nature. 475 (7357): 465–470.

doi:10.1038/nature10288 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature10288). PMID 21796204 (https://

pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21796204). S2CID 205225790 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/Cor

pusID:205225790).

30. Turner, Alan H.; Pol, D.; Clarke, J. A.; Erickson, G. M.; Norell, M. A. (7 September 2007). "A

basal dromaeosaurid and size evolution preceding avian flight" (http://www.sciencemag.org/

cgi/reprint/317/5843/1378.pdf) (PDF). Science. 317 (5843): 1378–1381.

Bibcode:2007Sci...317.1378T (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007Sci...317.1378T).

doi:10.1126/science.1144066 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1144066).

PMID 17823350 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17823350). S2CID 2519726 (https://api.se

manticscholar.org/CorpusID:2519726). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/

http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/reprint/317/5843/1378.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9

October 2022.

31. Xu, X.; Zhou, Z.; Wang, X.; Kuang, X.; Zhang, F.; Du, X. (23 January 2003). "Four-winged

dinosaurs from China" (http://doc.rero.ch/record/15275/files/PAL_E2574.pdf) (PDF). Nature.

421 (6921): 335–340. Bibcode:2003Natur.421..335X (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003

Natur.421..335X). doi:10.1038/nature01342 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature01342).

PMID 12540892 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12540892). S2CID 1160118 (https://api.se

manticscholar.org/CorpusID:1160118). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/202006020512

19/http://doc.rero.ch/record/15275/files/PAL_E2574.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 2 June 2020.

32. Luiggi, Christina (July 2011). "On the Origin of Birds" (https://web.archive.org/web/20120616

171500/http://the-scientist.com/2011/07/27/on-the-origin-of-birds/). The Scientist. Archived from the original (http://the-scientist.com/2011/07/27/on-the-origin-of-birds) on 16 June 2012.

Retrieved 11 June 2012.

33. Mayr, G.; Pohl, B.; Hartman, S.; Peters, D. S. (January 2007). "The tenth skeletal specimen of

Archaeopteryx" (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1096-3642.2006.00245.x). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society. 149 (1): 97–116. doi:10.1111/j.1096-3642.2006.00245.x (https://doi.o

rg/10.1111%2Fj.1096-3642.2006.00245.x).

34. Ivanov, M.; Hrdlickova, S.; Gregorova, R. (2001). The Complete Encyclopedia of Fossils.

Netherlands: Rebo Publishers. p. 312.





35. Benton, Michael J.; Dhouailly, Danielle; Jiang, Baoyu; McNamara, Maria (1 September

2019). "The Early Origin of Feathers" (http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169

534719301405). Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 34 (9): 856–869.

Bibcode:2019TEcoE..34..856B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019TEcoE..34..856B).

doi:10.1016/j.tree.2019.04.018 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.tree.2019.04.018).

hdl:10468/8068 (https://hdl.handle.net/10468%2F8068). ISSN 0169-5347 (https://www.world

cat.org/issn/0169-5347). PMID 31164250 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31164250).

S2CID 174811556 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:174811556).

36. Zheng, X.; Zhou, Z.; Wang, X.; Zhang, F.; Zhang, X.; Wang, Y.; Wei, G.; Wang, S.; Xu, X. (15

March 2013). "Hind Wings in Basal Birds and the Evolution of Leg Feathers". Science. 339

(6125): 1309–1312. Bibcode:2013Sci...339.1309Z (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013S

ci...339.1309Z). CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1031.5732 (https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summar

y?doi=10.1.1.1031.5732). doi:10.1126/science.1228753 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.

1228753). PMID 23493711 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23493711). S2CID 206544531

(https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:206544531).

37. Chiappe, Luis M. (2007). Glorified Dinosaurs: The Origin and Early Evolution of Birds.

Sydney: University of New South Wales Press. ISBN 978-0-86840-413-4.

38. Pickrell, John (22 March 2018). "Early birds may have been too hefty to sit on their eggs".

Nature. doi:10.1038/d41586-018-03447-3 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fd41586-018-03447-3).

39. Agency France-Presse (April 2011). "Birds survived dino extinction with keen senses" (http

s://web.archive.org/web/20150402124421/http://archive.cosmosmagazine.com/news/birds-s

urvived-dino-extinction-with-keen-senses/). Cosmos Magazine. Archived from the original (ht

tp://archive.cosmosmagazine.com/news/birds-survived-dino-extinction-with-keen-senses/)

on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 11 June 2012.

40. Wang, M.; Zheng, X.; O'Connor, J. K.; Lloyd, G. T.; Wang, X.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, X.; Zhou, Z.

(2015). "The oldest record of ornithuromorpha from the early cretaceous of China" (https://ww

w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5426517). Nature Communications. 6 (6987): 6987.

Bibcode:2015NatCo...6.6987W (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015NatCo...6.6987W).

doi:10.1038/ncomms7987 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fncomms7987). PMC 5426517 (https://

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5426517). PMID 25942493 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nl

m.nih.gov/25942493).

41. Elbein, Asher. "Why Do Birds Have Such Skinny Legs?" (https://www.scientificamerican.co

m/article/why-do-birds-have-such-skinny-legs/). Scientific American. Retrieved 15 February 2024.

42. Brusatte, S.L.; O'Connor, J.K.; Jarvis, J.D. (2015). "The Origin and Diversification of Birds" (ht

tps://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cub.2015.08.003). Current Biology. 25 (19): R888–R898.

Bibcode:2015CBio...25.R888B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015CBio...25.R888B).

doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.08.003 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cub.2015.08.003).

hdl:10161/11144 (https://hdl.handle.net/10161%2F11144). PMID 26439352 (https://pubmed.

ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26439352). S2CID 3099017 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:309

9017).

43. Clarke, Julia A. (2004). "Morphology, Phylogenetic Taxonomy, and Systematics of

Ichthyornis and Apatornis (Avialae: Ornithurae)" (https://web.archive.org/web/200903032212

06/http://digitallibrary.amnh.org/dspace/bitstream/2246/454/1/B286.pdf) (PDF). Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History. 286: 1–179. doi:10.1206/0003-

0090(2004)286<0001:MPTASO>2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/10.1206%2F0003-0090%28200

4%29286%3C0001%3AMPTASO%3E2.0.CO%3B2). hdl:2246/454 (https://hdl.handle.net/22

46%2F454). S2CID 84035285 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:84035285).

Archived from the original (http://digitallibrary.amnh.org/dspace/bitstream/2246/454/1/B286.p

df) (PDF) on 3 March 2009. Retrieved 14 September 2007.





44. Louchart, A.; Viriot, L. (2011). "From snout to beak: the loss of teeth in birds" (https://web.arch

ive.org/web/20140728053547/http://198.81.200.84/trends/ecology-evolution/abstract/S0169-

5347%2811%2900264-3?switch=standard). Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 26 (12): 663–

673. Bibcode:2011TEcoE..26..663L (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011TEcoE..26..663

L). doi:10.1016/j.tree.2011.09.004 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.tree.2011.09.004).

PMID 21978465 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21978465). Archived from the original (htt

p://198.81.200.84/trends/ecology-evolution/abstract/S0169-5347%2811%2900264-3?switch

=standard) on 28 July 2014.

45. Clarke, J. A.; Zhou, Z.; Zhang, F. (March 2006). "Insight into the evolution of avian flight from

a new clade of Early Cretaceous ornithurines from China and the morphology of Yixianornis

grabaui" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2100246). Journal of Anatomy. 208

(3): 287–308. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7580.2006.00534.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1469-758

0.2006.00534.x). PMC 2100246 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2100246).

PMID 16533313 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16533313).

46. Felice, Ryan N.; Goswami, Anjali (2018). "Developmental origins of mosaic evolution in the

avian cranium" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5776993). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 115 (3): 555–60.

Bibcode:2018PNAS..115..555F (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018PNAS..115..555F).

doi:10.1073/pnas.1716437115 (https://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.1716437115).

PMC 5776993 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5776993). PMID 29279399 (h

ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29279399).

47. Lee, Michael S. Y.; Cau, Andrea; Naish, Darren; Dyke, Gareth J. (May 2014). "Morphological

Clocks in Paleontology, and a Mid-Cretaceous Origin of Crown Aves" (https://academic.oup.

com/sysbio/article-pdf/63/3/442/9164850/syt110.pdf) (PDF). Systematic Biology. 63 (1).

Oxford Journals: 442–449. doi:10.1093/sysbio/syt110 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fsysbio%2

Fsyt110). PMID 24449041 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24449041).

48. Prum, R. O.; et al. (2015). "A comprehensive phylogeny of birds (Aves) using targeted next-

generation DNA sequencing". Nature. 526 (7574): 569–573. Bibcode:2015Natur.526..569P

(https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015Natur.526..569P). doi:10.1038/nature15697 (https://d

oi.org/10.1038%2Fnature15697). PMID 26444237 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/264442

37). S2CID 205246158 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:205246158).

49. Ericson, Per G.P.; et al. (2006). "Diversification of Neoaves: integration of molecular

sequence data and fossils" (https://web.archive.org/web/20090325235703/http://www.senck

enberg.de/files/content/forschung/abteilung/terrzool/ornithologie/neoaves.pdf) (PDF).

Biology Letters. 2 (4): 543–547. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2006.0523 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frsbl.

2006.0523). PMC 1834003 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1834003).

PMID 17148284 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17148284). Archived from the original (htt

p://www.senckenberg.de/files/content/forschung/abteilung/terrzool/ornithologie/neoaves.pdf)

(PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 4 July 2008.

50. Clarke, Julia A.; Tambussi, Claudia P.; Noriega, Jorge I.; Erickson, Gregory M.; Ketcham,

Richard A. (January 2005). "Definitive fossil evidence for the extant avian radiation in the

Cretaceous" (http://doc.rero.ch/record/15294/files/PAL_E2593.pdf) (PDF). Nature. 433

(7023): 305–308. Bibcode:2005Natur.433..305C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005Nat

ur.433..305C). doi:10.1038/nature03150 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature03150).

hdl:11336/80763 (https://hdl.handle.net/11336%2F80763). PMID 15662422 (https://pubmed.

ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15662422). S2CID 4354309 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:435

4309). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20200610180636/http://doc.rero.ch/record/1529

4/files/PAL_E2593.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 10 June 2020.





51. Clarke, J. A. (2004). "Morphology, phylogenetic taxonomy, and systematics of Ichthyornis

and Apatornis (Avialae: Ornithurae)" (https://web.archive.org/web/20150619214015/http://dig

itallibrary.amnh.org/dspace/bitstream/handle/2246/454/B286.?sequence=1). Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History. 286: 1–179. doi:10.1206/0003-

0090(2004)286<0001:mptaso>2.0.co;2 (https://doi.org/10.1206%2F0003-0090%282004%29

286%3C0001%3Amptaso%3E2.0.co%3B2). hdl:2246/454 (https://hdl.handle.net/2246%2F4

54). S2CID 84035285 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:84035285). Archived from

the original (http://digitallibrary.amnh.org/dspace/bitstream/handle/2246/454/B286.?sequenc

e=1) on 19 June 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2015.

52. Jarvis, E. D.; et al. (2014). "Whole-genome analyses resolve early branches in the tree of life

of modern birds" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4405904). Science. 346

(6215): 1320–1331. Bibcode:2014Sci...346.1320J (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014S

ci...346.1320J). doi:10.1126/science.1253451 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1253451).

PMC 4405904 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4405904). PMID 25504713 (h

ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25504713).

53. Mitchell, K. J.; Llamas, B.; Soubrier, J.; Rawlence, N. J.; Worthy, T. H.; Wood, J.; Lee, M. S. Y.;

Cooper, A. (23 May 2014). "Ancient DNA reveals elephant birds and kiwi are sister taxa and

clarifies ratite bird evolution" (http://dspace.flinders.edu.au/xmlui/bitstream/2328/35953/1/Mit

chell_AncientDNA_AM2014.pdf) (PDF). Science. 344 (6186): 898–900.

Bibcode:2014Sci...344..898M (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014Sci...344..898M).

doi:10.1126/science.1251981 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1251981).

hdl:2328/35953 (https://hdl.handle.net/2328%2F35953). PMID 24855267 (https://pubmed.nc

bi.nlm.nih.gov/24855267). S2CID 206555952 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:206

555952).

54. Ritchison, Gary. "Bird biogeography" (http://people.eku.edu/ritchisong/birdbiogeography1.ht

m). Avian Biology. Eastern Kentucky University. Retrieved 10 April 2008.

55. Cracraft, J. (2013). "Avian Higher-level Relationships and Classification: Nonpasseriforms".

In Dickinson, E. C.; Remsen, J. V. (eds.). The Howard and Moore Complete Checklist of the

Birds of the World. Vol. 1 (4th ed.). Aves Press, Eastbourne, U.K. pp. xxi–xli.

56. "Welcome" (https://doi.org/10.14344%2Fioc.ml.9.2). IOC World Bird List 9.2.

doi:10.14344/ioc.ml.9.2 (https://doi.org/10.14344%2Fioc.ml.9.2).

57. "October 2022 | Clements Checklist" (https://www.birds.cornell.edu/clementschecklist/update

index/october-2022/). www.birds.cornell.edu. Retrieved 6 January 2023.

58. Stiller, J., Feng, S., Chowdhury, AA. et al. Complexity of avian evolution revealed by family-

level genomes. Nature (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07323-1

59. Boyd, John (2007). " NEORNITHES: 46 Orders" (http://jboyd.net/Taxo/Orders.pdf) (PDF).

John Boyd's website. Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://jboyd.net/Ta

xo/Orders.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2017.

60. Sibley, Charles; Jon Edward Ahlquist (1990). Phylogeny and classification of birds. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-04085-7.

61. Mayr, Ernst; Short, Lester L. (1970). Species Taxa of North American Birds: A Contribution to Comparative Systematics. Publications of the Nuttall Ornithological Club, no. 9. Cambridge,

MA: Nuttall Ornithological Club. OCLC 517185 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/517185).

62. Holmes, Bob (10 February 2022). "Learning about birds from their genomes" (https://knowabl

emagazine.org/article/living-world/2022/learning-about-birds-their-genomes). Knowable Magazine. doi:10.1146/knowable-021022-1 (https://doi.org/10.1146%2Fknowable-021022-

1). Retrieved 11 February 2022.





63. Bravo, Gustavo A.; Schmitt, C. Jonathan; Edwards, Scott V. (3 November 2021). "What Have

We Learned from the First 500 Avian Genomes?". Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and

Systematics. 52 (1): 611–639. doi:10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-012121-085928 (https://doi.org/

10.1146%2Fannurev-ecolsys-012121-085928). ISSN 1543-592X (https://www.worldcat.org/i

ssn/1543-592X). S2CID 239655248 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:239655248).

64. Feng, Shaohong; et al. (2020). "Dense sampling of bird diversity increases power of

comparative genomics" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7759463). Nature.

587 (7833): 252–257. Bibcode:2020Natur.587..252F (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020

Natur.587..252F). doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2873-9 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41586-020-2

873-9). ISSN 0028-0836 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0028-0836). PMC 7759463 (https://w

ww.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7759463). PMID 33177665 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.

nih.gov/33177665).

65. Newton, Ian (2003). The Speciation and Biogeography of Birds. Amsterdam: Academic

Press. p. 463. ISBN 0-12-517375-X.

66. Brooke, Michael (2004). Albatrosses And Petrels Across The World. Oxford: Oxford

University Press. ISBN 0-19-850125-0.

67. Weir, Jason T.; Schluter, D (2007). "The Latitudinal Gradient in Recent Speciation and

Extinction Rates of Birds and Mammals". Science. 315 (5818): 1574–1576.

Bibcode:2007Sci...315.1574W (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007Sci...315.1574W).

doi:10.1126/science.1135590 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1135590).

PMID 17363673 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17363673). S2CID 46640620 (https://api.s

emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:46640620).

68. Schreiber, Elizabeth Anne; Joanna Burger (2001). Biology of Marine Birds. Boca Raton:

CRC Press. ISBN 0-8493-9882-7.

69. Sato, Katsufumi; Naito, Y.; Kato, A.; Niizuma, Y.; Watanuki, Y.; Charrassin, J. B.; Bost, C. A.;

Handrich, Y.; Le Maho, Y. (1 May 2002). "Buoyancy and maximal diving depth in penguins:

do they control inhaling air volume?" (http://jeb.biologists.org/cgi/content/full/205/9/1189).

Journal of Experimental Biology. 205 (9): 1189–1197. doi:10.1242/jeb.205.9.1189 (https://do

i.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.205.9.1189). PMID 11948196 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/119481

96).

70. Hill, David; Peter Robertson (1988). The Pheasant: Ecology, Management, and

Conservation. Oxford: BSP Professional. ISBN 0-632-02011-3.

71. Spreyer, Mark F.; Enrique H. Bucher (1998). "Monk Parakeet (Myiopsitta monachus)" (http://b

na.birds.cornell.edu/bna/species/322). The Birds of North America. Cornell Lab of Ornithology. doi:10.2173/bna.322 (https://doi.org/10.2173%2Fbna.322). Retrieved 13 December 2015.

72. Arendt, Wayne J. (1 January 1988). "Range Expansion of the Cattle Egret, ( Bubulcus ibis) in

the Greater Caribbean Basin". Colonial Waterbirds. 11 (2): 252–262. doi:10.2307/1521007

(https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1521007). JSTOR 1521007 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/152100

7).

73. Bierregaard, R. O. (1994). "Yellow-headed Caracara". In Josep del Hoyo; Andrew Elliott;

Jordi Sargatal (eds.). Handbook of the Birds of the World. Volume 2; New World Vultures to

Guineafowl. Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-15-6.

74. Juniper, Tony; Mike Parr (1998). Parrots: A Guide to the Parrots of the World. London:

Christopher Helm. ISBN 0-7136-6933-0.

75. Weijden, Wouter van der; Terwan, Paul; Guldemond, Adriaan, eds. (2010). Farmland Birds

across the World. Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. p. 4. ISBN 9788496553637.





76. Ehrlich, Paul R.; David S. Dobkin; Darryl Wheye (1988). "Adaptations for Flight" (http://www.

stanford.edu/group/stanfordbirds/text/essays/Adaptations.html). Birds of Stanford. Stanford

University. Retrieved 13 December 2007. Based on The Birder's Handbook (Paul Ehrlich,

David Dobkin, and Darryl Wheye. 1988. Simon and Schuster, New York.)

77. Gill, Frank (1995). Ornithology. New York: WH Freeman and Co. ISBN 0-7167-2415-4.

78. Noll, Paul. "The Avian Skeleton" (http://www.paulnoll.com/Oregon/Birds/Avian-Skeleton.htm

l). paulnoll.com. Retrieved 13 December 2007.

79. "Skeleton of a typical bird" (http://fsc.fernbank.edu/Birding/skeleton.htm). Fernbank Science Center's Ornithology Web. Retrieved 13 December 2007.

80. "The Surprising Closest Relative of the Huge Elephant Birds" (https://web.archive.org/web/2

0181214065448/https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/phenomena/2014/05/22/the-s

urprising-closest-relative-of-the-huge-elephant-birds/). Science & Innovation. 22 May 2014.

Archived from the original (https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/phenomena/2014/0

5/22/the-surprising-closest-relative-of-the-huge-elephant-birds/) on 14 December 2018.

Retrieved 6 March 2019.

81. Ehrlich, Paul R.; David S. Dobkin; Darryl Wheye (1988). "Drinking" (http://www.stanford.edu/

group/stanfordbirds/text/essays/Drinking.html). Birds of Stanford. Stanford University.

Retrieved 13 December 2007.

82. Tsahar, Ella; Martínez Del Rio, C; Izhaki, I; Arad, Z (2005). "Can birds be ammonotelic?

Nitrogen balance and excretion in two frugivores" (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.01495).

Journal of Experimental Biology. 208 (6): 1025–1034. doi:10.1242/jeb.01495 (https://doi.org/

10.1242%2Fjeb.01495). PMID 15767304 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15767304).

S2CID 18540594 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:18540594).

83. Skadhauge, E; Erlwanger, KH; Ruziwa, SD; Dantzer, V; Elbrønd, VS; Chamunorwa, JP

(2003). "Does the ostrich ( Struthio camelus) coprodeum have the electrophysiological

properties and microstructure of other birds?". Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology A.

134 (4): 749–755. doi:10.1016/S1095-6433(03)00006-0 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS1095-6

433%2803%2900006-0). PMID 12814783 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12814783).

84. Preest, Marion R.; Beuchat, Carol A. (April 1997). "Ammonia excretion by hummingbirds".

Nature. 386 (6625): 561–562. Bibcode:1997Natur.386..561P (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/a

bs/1997Natur.386..561P). doi:10.1038/386561a0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F386561a0).

S2CID 4372695 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4372695).

85. Mora, J.; Martuscelli, J; Ortiz Pineda, J; Soberon, G (1965). "The regulation of urea-

biosynthesis enzymes in vertebrates" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12069

04). Biochemical Journal. 96 (1): 28–35. doi:10.1042/bj0960028 (https://doi.org/10.1042%2F

bj0960028). PMC 1206904 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1206904).

PMID 14343146 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14343146).

86. Packard, Gary C. (1966). "The Influence of Ambient Temperature and Aridity on Modes of

Reproduction and Excretion of Amniote Vertebrates". The American Naturalist. 100 (916): 667–682. doi:10.1086/282459 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F282459). JSTOR 2459303 (http

s://www.jstor.org/stable/2459303). S2CID 85424175 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusI

D:85424175).

87. Balgooyen, Thomas G. (1 October 1971). "Pellet Regurgitation by Captive Sparrow Hawks

( Falco sparverius)" (https://web.archive.org/web/20140224142542/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/

default/files/journals/condor/v073n03/p0382-p0385.pdf) (PDF). Condor. 73 (3): 382–385.

doi:10.2307/1365774 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1365774). JSTOR 1365774 (https://www.js

tor.org/stable/1365774). Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/jour

nals/condor/v073n03/p0382-p0385.pdf) (PDF) on 24 February 2014 – via Searchable Ornithological Research Archive.





88. Jones, Benji (7 August 2018). "What Are Fecal Sacs? Bird Diapers, Basically" (https://www.a

udubon.org/news/what-are-fecal-sacs-bird-diapers-basically). Audubon. Retrieved 17 January 2021.

89. Encyclopedia of Animal Behavior (https://books.google.com/books?id=O5lnDwAAQBAJ&pg

=RA3-PA513). Academic Press. 21 January 2019. ISBN 978-0-12-813252-4.

90. Yong, Ed (6 June 2013). "How Chickens Lost Their Penises (And Ducks Kept Theirs)" (http

s://web.archive.org/web/20130609052803/http://phenomena.nationalgeographic.com/2013/0

6/06/how-chickens-lost-their-penises-ducks-kept-theirs/). Phenomena: Not Exactly Rocket Science. National Geographic. Archived from the original (http://phenomena.nationalgeograp

hic.com/2013/06/06/how-chickens-lost-their-penises-ducks-kept-theirs/) on 9 June 2013.

Retrieved 3 October 2013.

91. "Ornithology, 3rd Edition – Waterfowl: Order Anseriformes" (https://web.archive.org/web/2015

0622030534/http://bcs.whfreeman.com/gill/bcs-pages/body-right_10.asp?s=10000&n=0001

0&i=99010.06&v=chapter&o=%7C13000%7C00010%7C&ns=undefined). Archived from the

original (http://bcs.whfreeman.com/gill/bcs-pages/body-right_10.asp?s=10000&n=00010&i=

99010.06&v=chapter&o=%7C13000%7C00010%7C&ns=undefined) on 22 June 2015.

Retrieved 3 October 2013.

92. McCracken, KG (2000). "The 20-cm Spiny Penis of the Argentine Lake Duck (Oxyura

vittata)" (https://web.archive.org/web/20160304210246/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/

journals/auk/v117n03/p00820-p00825.pdf) (PDF). The Auk. 117 (3): 820–825.

doi:10.1642/0004-8038(2000)117[0820:TCSPOT]2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/10.1642%2F0004

-8038%282000%29117%5B0820%3ATCSPOT%5D2.0.CO%3B2). S2CID 5717257 (https://

api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5717257). Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/

sites/default/files/journals/auk/v117n03/p00820-p00825.pdf) (PDF) on 4 March 2016.

93. Marcus, Adam (2011). "Ostrich penis clears up evolutionary mystery" (https://www.nature.co

m/articles/nature.2011.9600). Nature. doi:10.1038/nature.2011.9600 (https://doi.org/10.103

8%2Fnature.2011.9600). S2CID 84524738 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:84524

738).

94. Sasanami, Tomohiro; Matsuzaki, Mei; Mizushima, Shusei; Hiyama, Gen (2013). "Sperm

Storage in the Female Reproductive Tract in Birds" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/article

s/PMC3944358). Journal of Reproduction and Development. 59 (4): 334–338.

doi:10.1262/jrd.2013-038 (https://doi.org/10.1262%2Fjrd.2013-038). ISSN 0916-8818 (http

s://www.worldcat.org/issn/0916-8818). PMC 3944358 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/arti

cles/PMC3944358). PMID 23965601 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23965601).

95. Birkhead, T. R.; Møller, P. (1993). "Sexual selection and the temporal separation of

reproductive events: sperm storage data from reptiles, birds and mammals". Biological

Journal of the Linnean Society. 50 (4): 295–311. doi:10.1111/j.1095-8312.1993.tb00933.x (ht

tps://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1095-8312.1993.tb00933.x).

96. Guioli, Silvana; Nandi, Sunil; Zhao, Debiao; Burgess-Shannon, Jessica; Lovell-Badge,

Robin; Clinton, Michael (2014). "Gonadal Asymmetry and Sex Determination in Birds" (http

s://www.karger.com/Article/FullText/358406). Sexual Development. 8 (5): 227–242.

doi:10.1159/000358406 (https://doi.org/10.1159%2F000358406). ISSN 1661-5433 (https://w

ww.worldcat.org/issn/1661-5433). PMID 24577119 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/245771

19). S2CID 3035039 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:3035039).

97. Dawson, Alistair (April 2015). "Annual gonadal cycles in birds: Modeling the effects of

photoperiod on seasonal changes in GnRH-1 secretion" (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.yfrne.2

014.08.004). Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology. 37: 52–64. doi:10.1016/j.yfrne.2014.08.004 (h

ttps://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.yfrne.2014.08.004). PMID 25194876 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.

gov/25194876). S2CID 13704885 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13704885).





98. Farner, Donald S.; Follett, Brian K.; King, James R.; Morton, Msrtin L. (February 1966). "A

Quantitative Examination of Ovarian Growth in the White-Crowned Sparrow" (https://www.bi

odiversitylibrary.org/part/9389). The Biological Bulletin. 130 (1): 67–75. doi:10.2307/1539953

(https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1539953). JSTOR 1539953 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/153995

3). PMID 5948479 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/5948479).

99. Ramachandran, R.; McDaniel, C. D. (2018). "Parthenogenesis in birds: a review" (https://rep.

bioscientifica.com/view/journals/rep/155/6/REP-17-0728.xml). Reproduction. 155 (6): R245–

R257. doi:10.1530/REP-17-0728 (https://doi.org/10.1530%2FREP-17-0728). ISSN 1470-

1626 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/1470-1626). PMID 29559496 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.n

ih.gov/29559496). S2CID 4017618 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4017618).

100. Kobayashi, Kazuya; Kitano, Takeshi; Iwao, Yasuhiro; Kondo, Mariko (1 June 2018).

Reproductive and Developmental Strategies: The Continuity of Life (https://books.google.co

m/books?id=g4teDwAAQBAJ&q=mammal+gonochorism&pg=PA290). Springer. p. 290.

ISBN 978-4-431-56609-0.

101. Tuttle, Elaina M.; Bergland, Alan O.; Korody, Marisa L.; Brewer, Michael S.; Newhouse,

Daniel J.; Minx, Patrick; Stager, Maria; Betuel, Adam; Cheviron, Zachary A.; Warren, Wesley

C.; Gonser, Rusty A.; Balakrishnan, Christopher N. (2016). "Divergence and Functional

Degradation of a Sex Chromosome-like Supergene" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articl

es/PMC4747794). Current Biology. 26 (3): 344–350. Bibcode:2016CBio...26..344T (https://u

i.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016CBio...26..344T). doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.11.069 (https://doi.or

g/10.1016%2Fj.cub.2015.11.069). PMC 4747794 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/

PMC4747794). PMID 26804558 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26804558).

102. Göth, Anne (2007). "Incubation temperatures and sex ratios in Australian brush-turkey

( Alectura lathami) mounds". Austral Ecology. 32 (4): 278–285.

Bibcode:2007AusEc..32..378G (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2007AusEc..32..378G).

doi:10.1111/j.1442-9993.2007.01709.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1442-9993.2007.01709.

x).

103. Göth, A; Booth, DT (March 2005). "Temperature-dependent sex ratio in a bird" (https://www.n

cbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1629050). Biology Letters. 1 (1): 31–33.

doi:10.1098/rsbl.2004.0247 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frsbl.2004.0247). PMC 1629050 (http

s://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1629050). PMID 17148121 (https://pubmed.ncbi.

nlm.nih.gov/17148121).

104. Maina, John N. (November 2006). "Development, structure, and function of a novel

respiratory organ, the lung-air sac system of birds: to go where no other vertebrate has

gone". Biological Reviews. 81 (4): 545–579. doi:10.1017/S1464793106007111 (https://doi.or

g/10.1017%2FS1464793106007111) (inactive 31 January 2024). PMID 17038201 (https://pu

bmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17038201).

105. Suthers, Roderick A.; Sue Anne Zollinger (June 2004). "Producing song: the vocal

apparatus". Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1016 (1): 109–129. Bibcode:2004NYASA1016..109S (http

s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004NYASA1016..109S). doi:10.1196/annals.1298.041 (http

s://doi.org/10.1196%2Fannals.1298.041). PMID 15313772 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

15313772). S2CID 45809019 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:45809019).

106. Fitch, W.T. (1999). "Acoustic exaggeration of size in birds via tracheal elongation:

comparative and theoretical analyses". Journal of Zoology. 248: 31–48.

doi:10.1017/S095283699900504X (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS095283699900504X).

107. Scott, Robert B. (March 1966). "Comparative hematology: The phylogeny of the erythrocyte".

Annals of Hematology. 12 (6): 340–351. doi:10.1007/BF01632827 (https://doi.org/10.1007%

2FBF01632827). PMID 5325853 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/5325853).

S2CID 29778484 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:29778484).

108. Whittow, G. (2000). Whittow, G. Causey (ed.). Sturkie's Avian Physiology. San Diego:

Academic Press.





109. Molnar, Charles; Gair, Jane (14 May 2015). "21.3. Mammalian Heart and Blood Vessels" (htt

ps://opentextbc.ca/biology/chapter/21-3-mammalian-heart-and-blood-vessels/).

110. Hoagstrom, C.W. (2002). "Vertebrate Circulation". Magill's Encyclopedia of Science: Animal

Life. 1. Pasadena, California: Salem Press: 217–219.

111. Hill, Richard W. (2012). Hill, Richard W.; Wyse, Gordon A.; Anderson, Margaret (eds.).

Animal Physiology (Third ed.). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates. pp. 647–678.

112. Barbara, Taylor (2004). pockets: birds. UK: Dorling Kindersley. p. 16. ISBN 0-7513-5176-8.

113. Sales, James (2005). "The endangered kiwi: a review" (https://web.archive.org/web/2007092

6005337/http://www.ivb.cz/folia/54/1-2/01-20.pdf) (PDF). Folia Zoologica. 54 (1–2): 1–20.

Archived from the original (http://www.ivb.cz/folia/54/1-2/01-20.pdf) (PDF) on 26 September

2007. Retrieved 15 September 2007.

114. Ehrlich, Paul R.; David S. Dobkin; Darryl Wheye (1988). "The Avian Sense of Smell" (http://w

ww.stanford.edu/group/stanfordbirds/text/essays/Avian_Sense.html). Birds of Stanford.

Stanford University. Retrieved 13 December 2007.

115. Lequette, Benoit; Verheyden, Christophe; Jouventin, Pierre (August 1989). "Olfaction in

Subantarctic seabirds: Its phylogenetic and ecological significance" (https://web.archive.org/

web/20131225044650/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v091n03/p0732

-p0735.pdf) (PDF). The Condor. 91 (3): 732–735. doi:10.2307/1368131 (https://doi.org/10.23

07%2F1368131). JSTOR 1368131 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1368131). Archived from the

original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v091n03/p0732-p0735.pdf)

(PDF) on 25 December 2013.

116. Wilkie, Susan E.; Vissers, P. M.; Das, D.; Degrip, W. J.; Bowmaker, J. K.; Hunt, D. M.

(February 1998). "The molecular basis for UV vision in birds: spectral characteristics, cDNA

sequence and retinal localization of the UV-sensitive visual pigment of the budgerigar

(Melopsittacus undulatus)" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1219171).

Biochemical Journal. 330 (Pt 1): 541–547. doi:10.1042/bj3300541 (https://doi.org/10.1042%

2Fbj3300541). PMC 1219171 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1219171).

PMID 9461554 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9461554).

117. Olsson, Peter; Lind, Olle; Kelber, Almut; Simmons, Leigh (2018). "Chromatic and achromatic

vision: parameter choice and limitations for reliable model predictions" (https://doi.org/10.109

3%2Fbeheco%2Farx133). Behavioral Ecology. 29 (2): 273–282. doi:10.1093/beheco/arx133

(https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2Farx133). ISSN 1045-2249 (https://www.worldcat.org/i

ssn/1045-2249). S2CID 90704358 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:90704358).

118. Andersson, S.; J. Ornborg; M. Andersson (1998). "Ultraviolet sexual dimorphism and

assortative mating in blue tits" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1688915).

Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 265 (1395): 445–450. doi:10.1098/rspb.1998.0315 (http

s://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.1998.0315). PMC 1688915 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ar

ticles/PMC1688915).

119. Viitala, Jussi; Korplmäki, Erkki; Palokangas, Pälvl; Koivula, Minna (1995). "Attraction of

kestrels to vole scent marks visible in ultraviolet light". Nature. 373 (6513): 425–427.

Bibcode:1995Natur.373..425V (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1995Natur.373..425V).

doi:10.1038/373425a0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F373425a0). S2CID 4356193 (https://api.s

emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4356193).

120. Pettingill, Olin Sewall Jr. (1985). Ornithology in Laboratory and Field. Fifth Edition (https://bo

oks.google.com/books?id=livLBAAAQBAJ&pg=PA11). Orlando, FL: Academic Press. p. 11.

ISBN 0-12-552455-2.

121. Williams, David L.; Flach, E (March 2003). "Symblepharon with aberrant protrusion of the

nictitating membrane in the snowy owl ( Nyctea scandiaca)". Veterinary Ophthalmology. 6 (1):

11–13. doi:10.1046/j.1463-5224.2003.00250.x (https://doi.org/10.1046%2Fj.1463-5224.200

3.00250.x). PMID 12641836 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12641836).





122. Land, M. F. (2014). "Eye movements of vertebrates and their relation to eye form and

function". Journal of Comparative Physiology A. 201 (2): 195–214. doi:10.1007/s00359-014-

0964-5 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs00359-014-0964-5). PMID 25398576 (https://pubmed.nc

bi.nlm.nih.gov/25398576). S2CID 15836436 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:1583

6436).

123. Martin, Graham R.; Katzir, G (1999). "Visual fields in Short-toed Eagles, Circaetus gallicus

(Accipitridae), and the function of binocularity in birds". Brain, Behavior and Evolution. 53 (2):

55–66. doi:10.1159/000006582 (https://doi.org/10.1159%2F000006582). PMID 9933782 (htt

ps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9933782). S2CID 44351032 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/C

orpusID:44351032).

124. Saito, Nozomu (1978). "Physiology and anatomy of avian ear" (https://doi.org/10.1121%2F1.

2004193). The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 64 (S1): S3.

Bibcode:1978ASAJ...64....3S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1978ASAJ...64....3S).

doi:10.1121/1.2004193 (https://doi.org/10.1121%2F1.2004193).

125. Warham, John (1 May 1977). "The incidence, function and ecological significance of petrel

stomach oils" (http://www.newzealandecology.org/nzje/free_issues/ProNZES24_84.pdf)

(PDF). Proceedings of the New Zealand Ecological Society. 24 (3): 84–93. Archived (https://

ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://www.newzealandecology.org/nzje/free_issues/Pro

NZES24_84.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

126. Dumbacher, J.P.; Beehler, BM; Spande, TF; Garraffo, HM; Daly, JW (October 1992).

"Homobatrachotoxin in the genus Pitohui: chemical defense in birds?". Science. 258 (5083):

799–801. Bibcode:1992Sci...258..799D (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1992Sci...258..79

9D). doi:10.1126/science.1439786 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1439786).

PMID 1439786 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1439786).

127. Longrich, N.R.; Olson, S.L. (5 January 2011). "The bizarre wing of the Jamaican flightless

ibis Xenicibis xympithecus: a unique vertebrate adaptation" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/p

mc/articles/PMC3119002). Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 278

(1716): 2333–2337. doi:10.1098/rspb.2010.2117 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2010.211

7). PMC 3119002 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3119002).

PMID 21208965 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21208965).

128. Belthoff, James R.; Dufty; Gauthreaux (1 August 1994). "Plumage Variation, Plasma Steroids

and Social Dominance in Male House Finches" (http://works.bepress.com/james_belthoff/2

9). The Condor. 96 (3): 614–625. doi:10.2307/1369464 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F136946

4). JSTOR 1369464 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1369464).

129. Guthrie, R. Dale. "How We Use and Show Our Social Organs" (https://web.archive.org/web/

20070621225459/http://employees.csbsju.edu/lmealey/hotspots/chapter03.htm). Body Hot Spots: The Anatomy of Human Social Organs and Behavior. Archived from the original (htt

p://employees.csbsju.edu/lmealey/hotspots/chapter03.htm) on 21 June 2007. Retrieved 19 October 2007.

130. Humphrey, Philip S.; Parkes, K. C. (1 June 1959). "An approach to the study of molts and

plumages" (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v076n01/p0001-p0031.pdf)

(PDF). The Auk. 76 (1): 1–31. doi:10.2307/4081839 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F4081839).

JSTOR 4081839 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/4081839). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/ar

chive/20221009/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v076n01/p0001-p0031.pd

f) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

131. Pettingill Jr. OS (1970). Ornithology in Laboratory and Field. Burgess Publishing Co. ISBN 0-

12-552455-2.





132. de Beer, S. J.; Lockwood, G. M.; Raijmakers, J. H. F. S.; Raijmakers, J. M. H.; Scott, W. A.;

Oschadleus, H. D.; Underhill, L. G. (2001). SAFRING Bird Ringing Manual (https://web.archi

ve.org/web/20171019032817/http://safring.adu.org.za/downloads/ringers-manual.pdf) (PDF).

Archived from the original (http://safring.adu.org.za/downloads/ringers-manual.pdf) (PDF) on 19 October 2017.

133. Gargallo, Gabriel (1 June 1994). "Flight Feather Moult in the Red-Necked Nightjar

Caprimulgus ruficollis". Journal of Avian Biology. 25 (2): 119–124. doi:10.2307/3677029 (htt

ps://doi.org/10.2307%2F3677029). JSTOR 3677029 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/3677029).

134. Mayr, Ernst (1954). "The tail molt of small owls" (https://web.archive.org/web/201410040539

53/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v071n02/p0172-p0178.pdf) (PDF). The Auk. 71 (2): 172–178. doi:10.2307/4081571 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F4081571).

JSTOR 4081571 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/4081571). Archived from the original (http://sor

a.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v071n02/p0172-p0178.pdf) (PDF) on 4 October 2014.

135. Payne, Robert B. "Birds of the World, Biology 532" (https://web.archive.org/web/2012022606

2512/http://www.ummz.umich.edu/birds/resources/families_otw.html). Bird Division, University of Michigan Museum of Zoology. Archived from the original (http://www.ummz.umi

ch.edu/birds/resources/families_otw.html) on 26 February 2012. Retrieved 20 October 2007.

136. Turner, J. Scott (1997). "On the thermal capacity of a bird's egg warmed by a brood patch".

Physiological Zoology. 70 (4): 470–480. doi:10.1086/515854 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F51

5854). PMID 9237308 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9237308). S2CID 26584982 (https://

api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:26584982).

137. Walther, Bruno A. (2005). "Elaborate ornaments are costly to maintain: evidence for high

maintenance handicaps" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2Farh135). Behavioral

Ecology. 16 (1): 89–95. doi:10.1093/beheco/arh135 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2F

arh135).

138. Shawkey, Matthew D.; Pillai, Shreekumar R.; Hill, Geoffrey E. (2003). "Chemical warfare?

Effects of uropygial oil on feather-degrading bacteria". Journal of Avian Biology. 34 (4): 345–

349. doi:10.1111/j.0908-8857.2003.03193.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0908-8857.2003.0

3193.x).

139. Ehrlich, Paul R. (1986). "The Adaptive Significance of Anting" (https://web.archive.org/web/2

0160305202116/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v103n04/p0835-p0835.p

df) (PDF). The Auk. 103 (4): 835. Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/

files/journals/auk/v103n04/p0835-p0835.pdf) (PDF) on 5 March 2016.

140. Lucas, Alfred M. (1972). Avian Anatomy – integument. East Lansing, Michigan: USDA Avian

Anatomy Project, Michigan State University. pp. 67, 344, 394–601.

141. Roots, Clive (2006). Flightless Birds. Westport: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-33545-7.

142. McNab, Brian K. (October 1994). "Energy Conservation and the Evolution of Flightlessness

in Birds". The American Naturalist. 144 (4): 628–642. doi:10.1086/285697 (https://doi.org/10.

1086%2F285697). JSTOR 2462941 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/2462941).

S2CID 86511951 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:86511951).

143. "Flightlessness - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics" (https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/

earth-and-planetary-sciences/flightlessness).

144. Kovacs, Christopher E.; Meyers, RA (2000). "Anatomy and histochemistry of flight muscles in

a wing-propelled diving bird, the Atlantic Puffin, Fratercula arctica". Journal of Morphology.

244 (2): 109–125. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4687(200005)244:2<109::AID-JMOR2>3.0.CO;2-

0 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2F%28SICI%291097-4687%28200005%29244%3A2%3C109%3

A%3AAID-JMOR2%3E3.0.CO%3B2-0). PMID 10761049 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1

0761049). S2CID 14041453 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14041453).





145. Robert, Michel; McNeil, Raymond; Leduc, Alain (January 1989). "Conditions and

significance of night feeding in shorebirds and other water birds in a tropical lagoon" (https://

web.archive.org/web/20141004070208/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v1

06n01/p0094-p0101.pdf) (PDF). The Auk. 106 (1): 94–101. doi:10.2307/4087761 (https://doi.

org/10.2307%2F4087761). JSTOR 4087761 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/4087761). Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v106n01/p0094-p0101.p

df) (PDF) on 4 October 2014.

146. Gionfriddo, James P.; Best (1 February 1995). "Grit Use by House Sparrows: Effects of Diet

and Grit Size" (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v097n01/p0057-p0067.

pdf) (PDF). Condor. 97 (1): 57–67. doi:10.2307/1368983 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F136898

3). JSTOR 1368983 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1368983). Archived (https://ghostarchive.or

g/archive/20221009/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v097n01/p0057-p

0067.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

147. Hagey, Lee R.; Vidal, Nicolas; Hofmann, Alan F.; Krasowski, Matthew D. (2010). "Complex

Evolution of Bile Salts in Birds" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2990222).

The Auk. 127 (4): 820–831. doi:10.1525/auk.2010.09155 (https://doi.org/10.1525%2Fauk.20

10.09155). PMC 2990222 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2990222).

PMID 21113274 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21113274).

148. Attenborough, David (1998). The Life of Birds. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-01633-X.

149. Battley, Phil F.; Piersma, T; Dietz, MW; Tang, S; Dekinga, A; Hulsman, K (January 2000).

"Empirical evidence for differential organ reductions during trans-oceanic bird flight" (https://

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1690512). Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 267

(1439): 191–195. doi:10.1098/rspb.2000.0986 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2000.0986).

PMC 1690512 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1690512). PMID 10687826 (h

ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10687826). (Erratum in Proceedings of the Royal Society B

267(1461):2567.)

150. Reid, N. (2006). "Birds on New England wool properties – A woolgrower guide" (https://web.

archive.org/web/20110315005353/http://lwa.gov.au/files/products/land-water-and-wool/pf061

365/pf061365.pdf) (PDF). Land, Water & Wool Northern Tablelands Property Fact Sheet.

Australian Government – Land and Water Australia. Archived from the original (http://lwa.gov.

au/files/products/land-water-and-wool/pf061365/pf061365.pdf) (PDF) on 15 March 2011.

Retrieved 17 July 2010.

151. Nyffeler, M.; Şekercioğlu, Ç. H.; Whelan, C. J. (August 2018). "Insectivorous birds consume

an estimated 400–500 million tons of prey annually" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articl

es/PMC6061143). The Science of Nature. 105 (7–8): 47. Bibcode:2018SciNa.105...47N (http

s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018SciNa.105...47N). doi:10.1007/s00114-018-1571-z (http

s://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs00114-018-1571-z). PMC 6061143 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/p

mc/articles/PMC6061143). PMID 29987431 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29987431).

152. Paton, D. C.; Collins, B.G. (1 April 1989). "Bills and tongues of nectar-feeding birds: A review

of morphology, function, and performance, with intercontinental comparisons". Australian

Journal of Ecology. 14 (4): 473–506. doi:10.1111/j.1442-9993.1989.tb01457.x (https://doi.or

g/10.1111%2Fj.1442-9993.1989.tb01457.x).

153. Baker, Myron Charles; Baker, Ann Eileen Miller (1 April 1973). "Niche Relationships Among

Six Species of Shorebirds on Their Wintering and Breeding Ranges". Ecological

Monographs. 43 (2): 193–212. Bibcode:1973EcoM...43..193B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/

abs/1973EcoM...43..193B). doi:10.2307/1942194 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1942194).

JSTOR 1942194 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1942194).





154. Cherel, Yves; Bocher, P; De Broyer, C; Hobson, KA (2002). "Food and feeding ecology of the

sympatric thin-billed Pachyptila belcheri and Antarctic P. desolata prions at Iles Kerguelen,

Southern Indian Ocean" (https://doi.org/10.3354%2Fmeps228263). Marine Ecology

Progress Series. 228: 263–281. Bibcode:2002MEPS..228..263C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.e

du/abs/2002MEPS..228..263C). doi:10.3354/meps228263 (https://doi.org/10.3354%2Fmeps

228263).

155. Jenkin, Penelope M. (1957). "The Filter-Feeding and Food of Flamingoes (Phoenicopteri)".

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B. 240 (674): 401–493.

Bibcode:1957RSPTB.240..401J (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1957RSPTB.240..401J).

doi:10.1098/rstb.1957.0004 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frstb.1957.0004). JSTOR 92549 (http

s://www.jstor.org/stable/92549). S2CID 84979098 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:

84979098).

156. Hughes, Baz; Green, Andy J. (2005). "Feeding Ecology" (https://books.google.com/books?id

=MfrdBcKd79wC&pg=PA42). In Kear, Janet (ed.). Ducks, Geese and Swans. Oxford University Press. pp. 42–44. ISBN 978-0-19-861008-3.

157. Li, Zhiheng; Clarke, Julia A. (2016). "The Craniolingual Morphology of Waterfowl (Aves,

Anseriformes) and Its Relationship with Feeding Mode Revealed Through Contrast-

Enhanced X-Ray Computed Tomography and 2D Morphometrics" (https://link.springer.com/a

rticle/10.1007%2Fs11692-015-9345-4). Evolutionary Biology. 43 (1): 12–25.

Bibcode:2016EvBio..43...12L (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016EvBio..43...12L).

doi:10.1007/s11692-015-9345-4 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs11692-015-9345-4).

S2CID 17961182 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:17961182).

158. Takahashi, Akinori; Kuroki, Maki; Niizuma, Yasuaki; Watanuki, Yutaka (December 1999).

"Parental Food Provisioning Is Unrelated to Manipulated Offspring Food Demand in a

Nocturnal Single-Provisioning Alcid, the Rhinoceros Auklet". Journal of Avian Biology. 30

(4): 486. doi:10.2307/3677021 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3677021). JSTOR 3677021 (http

s://www.jstor.org/stable/3677021).

159. Bélisle, Marc; Giroux (1 August 1995). "Predation and kleptoparasitism by migrating

Parasitic Jaegers" (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v097n03/p0771-p0

781.pdf) (PDF). The Condor. 97 (3): 771–781. doi:10.2307/1369185 (https://doi.org/10.230

7%2F1369185). JSTOR 1369185 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1369185). Archived (https://gh

ostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v097

n03/p0771-p0781.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

160. Vickery, J. A. (May 1994). "The Kleptoparasitic Interactions between Great Frigatebirds and

Masked Boobies on Henderson Island, South Pacific". The Condor. 96 (2): 331–340.

doi:10.2307/1369318 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1369318). JSTOR 1369318 (https://www.js

tor.org/stable/1369318).

161. Hiraldo, F. C.; Blanco, J. C.; Bustamante, J. (1991). "Unspecialized exploitation of small

carcasses by birds". Bird Studies. 38 (3): 200–207. Bibcode:1991BirdS..38..200H (https://ui.

adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1991BirdS..38..200H). doi:10.1080/00063659109477089 (https://do

i.org/10.1080%2F00063659109477089). hdl:10261/47141 (https://hdl.handle.net/10261%2F

47141).

162. Engel, Sophia Barbara (2005). Racing the wind: Water economy and energy expenditure in

avian endurance flight (https://web.archive.org/web/20200405201429/http://irs.ub.rug.nl/ppn/

287916626). University of Groningen. ISBN 90-367-2378-7. Archived from the original (http://

irs.ub.rug.nl/ppn/287916626) on 5 April 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2008.





163. Tieleman, B.I.; Williams, JB (1999). "The role of hyperthermia in the water economy of desert

birds" (https://pure.rug.nl/ws/files/62402849/The_Role_of_Hyperthermia_in_the_Water_Eco

nomy_of_Desert_Birds.pdf) (PDF). Physiol. Biochem. Zool. 72 (1): 87–100.

doi:10.1086/316640 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2F316640). hdl:11370/6edc6940-c2e8-4c96-

832e-0b6982dd59c1 (https://hdl.handle.net/11370%2F6edc6940-c2e8-4c96-832e-0b6982d

d59c1). PMID 9882607 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9882607). S2CID 18920080 (http

s://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:18920080). Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/2

0221009/https://pure.rug.nl/ws/files/62402849/The_Role_of_Hyperthermia_in_the_Water_E

conomy_of_Desert_Birds.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

164. Schmidt-Nielsen, Knut (1 May 1960). "The Salt-Secreting Gland of Marine Birds" (https://doi.

org/10.1161%2F01.CIR.21.5.955). Circulation. 21 (5): 955–967.

doi:10.1161/01.CIR.21.5.955 (https://doi.org/10.1161%2F01.CIR.21.5.955). PMID 14443123

(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14443123). S2CID 2757501 (https://api.semanticscholar.or

g/CorpusID:2757501).

165. Hallager, Sara L. (1994). "Drinking methods in two species of bustards". Wilson Bull. 106 (4):

763–764. hdl:10088/4338 (https://hdl.handle.net/10088%2F4338).

166. MacLean, Gordon L. (1 June 1983). "Water Transport by Sandgrouse". BioScience. 33 (6):

365–369. doi:10.2307/1309104 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1309104). JSTOR 1309104 (http

s://www.jstor.org/stable/1309104).

167. Eraud C; Dorie A; Jacquet A; Faivre B (2008). "The crop milk: a potential new route for

carotenoid-mediated parental effects" (https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00294461/file/Erau

d2008.pdf) (PDF). Journal of Avian Biology. 39 (2): 247–251. doi:10.1111/j.0908-

8857.2008.04053.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0908-8857.2008.04053.x). Archived (https://

ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00294461/file/Eraud2

008.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

168. Mario, Principato; Federica, Lisi; Iolanda, Moretta; Nada, Samra; Francesco, Puccetti (2005).

"The alterations of plumage of parasitic origin" (https://doi.org/10.4081%2Fijas.2005.296).

Italian Journal of Animal Science. 4 (3): 296–299. doi:10.4081/ijas.2005.296 (https://doi.org/1

0.4081%2Fijas.2005.296). S2CID 84770232 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8477

0232).

169. Revis, Hannah C.; Waller, Deborah A. (2004). "Bactericidal and fungicidal activity of ant

chemicals on feather parasites: an evaluation of anting behavior as a method of self-

medication in songbirds" (https://doi.org/10.1642%2F0004-8038%282004%29121%5B126

2%3ABAFAOA%5D2.0.CO%3B2). The Auk. 121 (4): 1262–1268. doi:10.1642/0004-

8038(2004)121[1262:BAFAOA]2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/10.1642%2F0004-8038%282004%2

9121%5B1262%3ABAFAOA%5D2.0.CO%3B2). S2CID 85677766 (https://api.semanticschol

ar.org/CorpusID:85677766).

170. Clayton, Dale H.; Koop, Jennifer A.H.; Harbison, Christopher W.; Moyer, Brett R.; Bush,

Sarah E. (2010). "How Birds Combat Ectoparasites" (https://doi.org/10.2174%2F187445320

1003010041). The Open Ornithology Journal. 3: 41–71.

doi:10.2174/1874453201003010041 (https://doi.org/10.2174%2F1874453201003010041).

171. Battley, Phil F.; Piersma, T.; Dietz, M. W.; Tang, S; Dekinga, A.; Hulsman, K. (January 2000).

"Empirical evidence for differential organ reductions during trans-oceanic bird flight" (https://

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1690512). Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 267

(1439): 191–195. doi:10.1098/rspb.2000.0986 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2000.0986).

PMC 1690512 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1690512). PMID 10687826 (h

ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10687826). (Erratum in Proceedings of the Royal Society B

267(1461):2567.)





172. Klaassen, Marc (1 January 1996). "Metabolic constraints on long-distance migration in birds"

(http://jeb.biologists.org/cgi/reprint/199/1/57). Journal of Experimental Biology. 199 (1): 57–

64. doi:10.1242/jeb.199.1.57 (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.199.1.57). PMID 9317335 (http

s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9317335).

173. "Long-distance Godwit sets new record" (https://web.archive.org/web/20131002131732/htt

p://www.birdlife.org/news/news/2007/04/bar-tailed_godwit_journey.html). BirdLife

International. 4 May 2007. Archived from the original (http://www.birdlife.org/news/news/200

7/04/bar-tailed_godwit_journey.html) on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 13 December 2007.

174. Egevang, Carsten; Stenhouse, Iain J.; Phillips, Richard A.; Petersen, Aevar; Fox, James W.;

Silk, Janet R. D. (2010). "Tracking of Arctic terns Sterna paradisaea reveals longest animal

migration" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2836663). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (5): 2078–2081. Bibcode:2010PNAS..107.2078E (http

s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010PNAS..107.2078E). doi:10.1073/pnas.0909493107 (http

s://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.0909493107). PMC 2836663 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pm

c/articles/PMC2836663). PMID 20080662 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20080662).

175. Shaffer, Scott A.; et al. (2006). "Migratory shearwaters integrate oceanic resources across the

Pacific Ocean in an endless summer" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC15689

27). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 103

(34): 12799–12802. Bibcode:2006PNAS..10312799S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/200

6PNAS..10312799S). doi:10.1073/pnas.0603715103 (https://doi.org/10.1073%2Fpnas.0603

715103). PMC 1568927 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1568927).

PMID 16908846 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16908846).

176. Croxall, John P.; Silk, J. R.; Phillips, R. A.; Afanasyev, V.; Briggs, D. R. (2005). "Global

Circumnavigations: Tracking year-round ranges of nonbreeding Albatrosses". Science. 307

(5707): 249–250. Bibcode:2005Sci...307..249C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005Sci...

307..249C). doi:10.1126/science.1106042 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1106042).

PMID 15653503 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15653503). S2CID 28990783 (https://api.s

emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:28990783).

177. Wilson, W. Herbert Jr. (1999). "Bird feeding and irruptions of northern finches:are migrations

short stopped?" (https://web.archive.org/web/20140729162642/https://sora.unm.edu/sites/def

ault/files/journals/nabb/v024n04/p0113-p0121.pdf) (PDF). North America Bird Bander. 24

(4): 113–121. Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/nabb/

v024n04/p0113-p0121.pdf) (PDF) on 29 July 2014.

178. Nilsson, Anna L.K.; Alerstam, Thomas; Nilsson, Jan-Åke (2006). "Do partial and regular

migrants differ in their responses to weather?" (https://doi.org/10.1642%2F0004-8038%2820

06%29123%5B537%3ADPARMD%5D2.0.CO%3B2). The Auk. 123 (2): 537–547.

doi:10.1642/0004-8038(2006)123[537:DPARMD]2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/10.1642%2F0004-

8038%282006%29123%5B537%3ADPARMD%5D2.0.CO%3B2). S2CID 84665086 (https://

api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:84665086).

179. Chan, Ken (2001). "Partial migration in Australian landbirds: a review". Emu. 101 (4): 281–

292. Bibcode:2001EmuAO.101..281C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2001EmuAO.101..

281C). doi:10.1071/MU00034 (https://doi.org/10.1071%2FMU00034). S2CID 82259620 (http

s://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:82259620).

180. Rabenold, Kerry N. (1985). "Variation in Altitudinal Migration, Winter Segregation, and Site

Tenacity in two subspecies of Dark-eyed Juncos in the southern Appalachians" (http://sora.u

nm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/auk/v102n04/p0805-p0819.pdf) (PDF). The Auk. 102 (4): 805–819. Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/defa

ult/files/journals/auk/v102n04/p0805-p0819.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

181. Collar, Nigel J. (1997). "Family Psittacidae (Parrots)". In Josep del Hoyo; Andrew Elliott;

Jordi Sargatal (eds.). Handbook of the Birds of the World. Vol. 4: Sandgrouse to Cuckoos.

Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-22-9.





182. Matthews, G.V.T. (1 September 1953). "Navigation in the Manx Shearwater" (https://doi.org/1

0.1242%2Fjeb.30.3.370). Journal of Experimental Biology. 30 (2): 370–396.

doi:10.1242/jeb.30.3.370 (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.30.3.370).

183. Mouritsen, Henrik; Larsen, Ole Næsbye (15 November 2001). "Migrating songbirds tested in

computer-controlled Emlen funnels use stellar cues for a time-independent compass" (http

s://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.204.22.3855). Journal of Experimental Biology. 204 (8): 3855–

3865. doi:10.1242/jeb.204.22.3855 (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.204.22.3855).

PMID 11807103 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11807103).

184. Deutschlander, Mark E.; Phillips, J. B.; Borland, S. C. (15 April 1999). "The case for light-

dependent magnetic orientation in animals" (https://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.202.8.891).

Journal of Experimental Biology. 202 (8): 891–908. doi:10.1242/jeb.202.8.891 (https://doi.or

g/10.1242%2Fjeb.202.8.891). PMID 10085262 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10085262).

185. Möller, Anders Pape (1988). "Badge size in the house sparrow Passer domesticus" (https://w

ww.researchgate.net/publication/226147226). Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 22 (5): 373–378. doi:10.1007/BF00295107 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2FBF00295107).

JSTOR 4600164 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/4600164).

186. Thomas, Betsy Trent; Strahl (1 August 1990). "Nesting Behavior of Sunbitterns ( Eurypyga

helias) in Venezuela" (https://web.archive.org/web/20160305194240/http://sora.unm.edu/site

s/default/files/journals/condor/v092n03/p0576-p0581.pdf) (PDF). The Condor. 92 (3): 576–

581. doi:10.2307/1368675 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1368675). JSTOR 1368675 (https://w

ww.jstor.org/stable/1368675). Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/file

s/journals/condor/v092n03/p0576-p0581.pdf) (PDF) on 5 March 2016.

187. Pickering, S. P. C. (2001). "Courtship behaviour of the Wandering Albatross Diomedea

exulans at Bird Island, South Georgia" (http://www.marineornithology.org/PDF/29_1/29_1_6.

pdf) (PDF). Marine Ornithology. 29 (1): 29–37. Archived (https://ghostarchive.org/archive/202

21009/http://www.marineornithology.org/PDF/29_1/29_1_6.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9

October 2022.

188. Pruett-Jones, S.G.; Pruett-Jones (1 May 1990). "Sexual Selection Through Female Choice in

Lawes' Parotia, A Lek-Mating Bird of Paradise". Evolution. 44 (3): 486–501.

doi:10.2307/2409431 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F2409431). JSTOR 2409431 (https://www.js

tor.org/stable/2409431). PMID 28567971 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28567971).

189. Genevois, F.; Bretagnolle, V. (1994). "Male Blue Petrels reveal their body mass when

calling" (https://web.archive.org/web/20071224040649/http://ejour-fup.unifi.it/index.php/eee/

article/view/667/613). Ethology Ecology and Evolution. 6 (3): 377–383.

Bibcode:1994EtEcE...6..377G (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1994EtEcE...6..377G).

doi:10.1080/08927014.1994.9522988 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F08927014.1994.952298

8). Archived from the original (http://ejour-fup.unifi.it/index.php/eee/article/view/667/613) on 24 December 2007.

190. Roy, Suhridam; Kittur, Swati; Sundar, K. S. Gopi (2022). "Sarus crane Antigone antigone trios

and their triets: Discovery of a novel social unit in cranes" (https://doi.org/10.1002/ecy.3707).

Ecology. 103 (6): e3707. Bibcode:2022Ecol..103E3707R (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/

2022Ecol..103E3707R). doi:10.1002/ecy.3707 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fecy.3707).

PMID 35357696 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35357696).

191. Jouventin, Pierre; Aubin, T; Lengagne, T (June 1999). "Finding a parent in a king penguin

colony: the acoustic system of individual recognition". Animal Behaviour. 57 (6): 1175–1183.

doi:10.1006/anbe.1999.1086 (https://doi.org/10.1006%2Fanbe.1999.1086). PMID 10373249

(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10373249). S2CID 45578269 (https://api.semanticscholar.o

rg/CorpusID:45578269).





192. Templeton, Christopher N.; Greene, E; Davis, K (2005). "Allometry of Alarm Calls: Black-

Capped Chickadees Encode Information About Predator Size". Science. 308 (5730): 1934–

1937. Bibcode:2005Sci...308.1934T (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005Sci...308.1934

T). doi:10.1126/science.1108841 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1108841).

PMID 15976305 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15976305). S2CID 42276496 (https://api.s

emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:42276496).

193. Miskelly, C. M. (July 1987). "The identity of the hakawai". Notornis. 34 (2): 95–116.

194. Dodenhoff, Danielle J.; Stark, Robert D.; Johnson, Eric V. (2001). "Do woodpecker drums

encode information for species recognition?" (https://doi.org/10.1650%2F0010-5422%28200

1%29103%5B0143%3ADWDEIF%5D2.0.CO%3B2). The Condor. 103 (1): 143.

doi:10.1650/0010-5422(2001)103[0143:DWDEIF]2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/10.1650%2F0010-

5422%282001%29103%5B0143%3ADWDEIF%5D2.0.CO%3B2). ISSN 0010-5422 (https://

www.worldcat.org/issn/0010-5422). S2CID 31878910 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/Corpu

sID:31878910).

195. Murphy, Stephen; Legge, Sarah; Heinsohn, Robert (2003). "The breeding biology of palm

cockatoos ( Probosciger aterrimus): a case of a slow life history". Journal of Zoology. 261 (4): 327–339. doi:10.1017/S0952836903004175 (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS09528369030041

75).

196. Sekercioglu, Cagan Hakki (2006). "Foreword". In Josep del Hoyo; Andrew Elliott; David

Christie (eds.). Handbook of the Birds of the World. Vol. 11: Old World Flycatchers to Old World Warblers. Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. p. 48. ISBN 84-96553-06-X.

197. Terborgh, John (2005). "Mixed flocks and polyspecific associations: Costs and benefits of

mixed groups to birds and monkeys". American Journal of Primatology. 21 (2): 87–100.

doi:10.1002/ajp.1350210203 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fajp.1350210203). PMID 31963979

(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31963979). S2CID 83826161 (https://api.semanticscholar.o

rg/CorpusID:83826161).

198. Hutto, Richard L. (January 1988). "Foraging Behavior Patterns Suggest a Possible Cost

Associated with Participation in Mixed-Species Bird Flocks". Oikos. 51 (1): 79–83.

Bibcode:1988Oikos..51...79H (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1988Oikos..51...79H).

doi:10.2307/3565809 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3565809). JSTOR 3565809 (https://www.js

tor.org/stable/3565809).

199. Sundar, K. S. Gopi; Grant, John D. A.; Veltheim, Inka; Kittur, Swati; Brandis, Kate; McCarthy,

Michael A.; Scambler, Elinor (2019). "Sympatric cranes in northern Australia: abundance,

breeding success, habitat preference and diet" (https://doi.org/10.1080/01584197.2018.1537

673). Emu - Austral Ornithology. 119 (1): 79–89. Bibcode:2019EmuAO.119...79S (https://ui.a

dsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019EmuAO.119...79S). doi:10.1080/01584197.2018.1537673 (http

s://doi.org/10.1080%2F01584197.2018.1537673).

200. Au, David W.K.; Pitman (1 August 1986). "Seabird interactions with Dolphins and Tuna in the

Eastern Tropical Pacific" (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v088n03/p03

04-p0317.pdf) (PDF). The Condor. 88 (3): 304–317. doi:10.2307/1368877 (https://doi.org/10.

2307%2F1368877). JSTOR 1368877 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1368877). Archived (http

s://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://sora.unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/

v088n03/p0304-p0317.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

201. Anne, O.; Rasa, E. (June 1983). "Dwarf mongoose and hornbill mutualism in the Taru desert,

Kenya". Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 12 (3): 181–190. doi:10.1007/BF00290770

(https://doi.org/10.1007%2FBF00290770). S2CID 22367357 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/

CorpusID:22367357).





202. Gauthier-Clerc, Michael; Tamisier, Alain; Cézilly, Frank (2000). "Sleep-Vigilance Trade-off in

Gadwall during the Winter Period" (https://web.archive.org/web/20041227194439/http://sora.

unm.edu/sites/default/files/journals/condor/v102n02/p0307-p0313.pdf) (PDF). The Condor.

102 (2): 307–313. doi:10.1650/0010-5422(2000)102[0307:SVTOIG]2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/

10.1650%2F0010-5422%282000%29102%5B0307%3ASVTOIG%5D2.0.CO%3B2).

JSTOR 1369642 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1369642). S2CID 15957324 (https://api.seman

ticscholar.org/CorpusID:15957324). Archived from the original (http://sora.unm.edu/sites/defa

ult/files/journals/condor/v102n02/p0307-p0313.pdf) (PDF) on 27 December 2004.

203. Bäckman, Johan; A (1 April 2002). "Harmonic oscillatory orientation relative to the wind in

nocturnal roosting flights of the swift Apus apus" (http://jeb.biologists.org/cgi/content/full/205/

7/905). The Journal of Experimental Biology. 205 (7): 905–910. doi:10.1242/jeb.205.7.905 (h

ttps://doi.org/10.1242%2Fjeb.205.7.905). PMID 11916987 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1

1916987).

204. Rattenborg, Niels C. (2006). "Do birds sleep in flight?". Die Naturwissenschaften. 93 (9):

413–425. Bibcode:2006NW.....93..413R (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2006NW.....93..4

13R). doi:10.1007/s00114-006-0120-3 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs00114-006-0120-3).

PMID 16688436 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16688436). S2CID 1736369 (https://api.se

manticscholar.org/CorpusID:1736369).

205. Milius, S. (6 February 1999). "Half-asleep birds choose which half dozes". Science News

Online. 155 (6): 86. doi:10.2307/4011301 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F4011301).

JSTOR 4011301 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/4011301).

206. Beauchamp, Guy (1999). "The evolution of communal roosting in birds: origin and secondary

losses" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2F10.6.675). Behavioral Ecology. 10 (6): 675–

687. doi:10.1093/beheco/10.6.675 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2F10.6.675).

207. Buttemer, William A. (1985). "Energy relations of winter roost-site utilization by American

goldfinches ( Carduelis tristis)" (http://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/2027.42/47760/1/442

_2004_Article_BF00379484.pdf) (PDF). Oecologia. 68 (1): 126–132.

Bibcode:1985Oecol..68..126B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1985Oecol..68..126B).

doi:10.1007/BF00379484 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2FBF00379484). hdl:2027.42/47760 (htt

ps://hdl.handle.net/2027.42%2F47760). PMID 28310921 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2

8310921). S2CID 17355506 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:17355506). Archived

(https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20221009/http://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/2027.42/4

7760/1/442_2004_Article_BF00379484.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

208. Palmer, Meredith S.; Packer, Craig (2018). "Giraffe bed and breakfast: Camera traps reveal

Tanzanian yellow-billed oxpeckers roosting on their large mammalian hosts" (https://doi.org/

10.1111%2Faje.12505). African Journal of Ecology. 56 (4): 882–884.

Bibcode:2018AfJEc..56..882P (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018AfJEc..56..882P).

doi:10.1111/aje.12505 (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Faje.12505). ISSN 0141-6707 (https://ww

w.worldcat.org/issn/0141-6707).

209. Buckley, F.G.; Buckley (1 January 1968). "Upside-down Resting by Young Green-Rumped

Parrotlets ( Forpus passerinus)". The Condor. 70 (1): 89. doi:10.2307/1366517 (https://doi.or

g/10.2307%2F1366517). JSTOR 1366517 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1366517).

210. Carpenter, F. Lynn (1974). "Torpor in an Andean Hummingbird: Its Ecological Significance".

Science. 183 (4124): 545–547. Bibcode:1974Sci...183..545C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/

abs/1974Sci...183..545C). doi:10.1126/science.183.4124.545 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fsci

ence.183.4124.545). PMID 17773043 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17773043).

S2CID 42021321 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:42021321).

211. McKechnie, Andrew E.; Ashdown, Robert A.M.; Christian, Murray B.; Brigham, R. Mark

(2007). "Torpor in an African caprimulgid, the freckled nightjar Caprimulgus tristigma".

Journal of Avian Biology. 38 (3): 261–266. doi:10.1111/j.2007.0908-8857.04116.x (https://do

i.org/10.1111%2Fj.2007.0908-8857.04116.x).





212. Gill, Frank B.; Prum, Richard O. (2019). Ornithology (4 ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman.

pp. 390–396.

213. Cabello-Vergel, Julián; Soriano-Redondo, Andrea; Villegas, Auxiliadora; Masero, José A.;

Guzmán, Juan M. Sánchez; Gutiérrez, Jorge S. (2021). "Urohidrosis as an overlooked

cooling mechanism in long-legged birds" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC85

01033). Scientific Reports. 11 (1): 20018. Bibcode:2021NatSR..1120018C (https://ui.adsabs.

harvard.edu/abs/2021NatSR..1120018C). doi:10.1038/s41598-021-99296-8 (https://doi.org/1

0.1038%2Fs41598-021-99296-8). ISSN 2045-2322 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/2045-232

2). PMC 8501033 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8501033).

PMID 34625581 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34625581).

214. Frith, C. B. (1981). "Displays of Count Raggi's Bird-of-Paradise Paradisaea raggiana and

congeneric species" (http://www.publish.csiro.au/paper/MU9810193.htm). Emu. 81 (4): 193–

201. Bibcode:1981EmuAO..81..193F (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1981EmuAO..81..19

3F). doi:10.1071/MU9810193 (https://doi.org/10.1071%2FMU9810193).

215. Freed, Leonard A. (1987). "The Long-Term Pair Bond of Tropical House Wrens: Advantage

or Constraint?". The American Naturalist. 130 (4): 507–525. doi:10.1086/284728 (https://doi.

org/10.1086%2F284728). S2CID 84735736 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:84735

736).

216. Gowaty, Patricia A. (1983). "Male Parental Care and Apparent Monogamy among Eastern

Bluebirds ( Sialia sialis)". The American Naturalist. 121 (2): 149–160. doi:10.1086/284047 (ht

tps://doi.org/10.1086%2F284047). S2CID 84258620 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusI

D:84258620).

217. Westneat, David F.; Stewart, Ian R.K. (2003). "Extra-pair paternity in birds: Causes,

correlates, and conflict". Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics. 34: 365–

396. doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.34.011802.132439 (https://doi.org/10.1146%2Fannurev.ec

olsys.34.011802.132439).

218. Gowaty, Patricia A.; Buschhaus, Nancy (1998). "Ultimate causation of aggressive and forced

copulation in birds: Female resistance, the CODE hypothesis, and social monogamy" (http

s://doi.org/10.1093%2Ficb%2F38.1.207). American Zoologist. 38 (1): 207–225.

doi:10.1093/icb/38.1.207 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Ficb%2F38.1.207).

219. Sheldon, B (1994). "Male Phenotype, Fertility, and the Pursuit of Extra-Pair Copulations by

Female Birds". Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 257 (1348): 25–30.

Bibcode:1994RSPSB.257...25S (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1994RSPSB.257...25S).

doi:10.1098/rspb.1994.0089 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.1994.0089). S2CID 85745432

(https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:85745432).

220. Wei, G; Zuo-Hua, Yin; Fu-Min, Lei (2005). "Copulations and mate guarding of the Chinese

Egret". Waterbirds. 28 (4): 527–530. doi:10.1675/1524-

4695(2005)28[527:CAMGOT]2.0.CO;2 (https://doi.org/10.1675%2F1524-4695%282005%29

28%5B527%3ACAMGOT%5D2.0.CO%3B2). S2CID 86336632 (https://api.semanticscholar.

org/CorpusID:86336632).

221. Owens, Ian P. F.; Bennett, Peter M. (1997). "Variation in mating system among birds:

ecological basis revealed by hierarchical comparative analysis of mate desertion" (https://w

ww.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1688567). Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences. 264 (1385): 1103–1110. doi:10.1098/rspb.1997.0152

(https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.1997.0152). ISSN 0962-8452 (https://www.worldcat.org/iss

n/0962-8452). PMC 1688567 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1688567).

222. Petrie, Marion; Kempenaers, Bart (1998). "Extra-pair paternity in birds: explaining variation

between species and populations". Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 13 (2): 52–58.

Bibcode:1998TEcoE..13...52P (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998TEcoE..13...52P).

doi:10.1016/S0169-5347(97)01232-9 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0169-5347%2897%2901

232-9). PMID 21238200 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21238200).





223. Barve, Sahas; Riehl, C.; Walters, E. L.; Haydock, J.; Dugdale, H. L.; Koenig, W. D. (2021).

"Lifetime Reproductive Benefits of Cooperative Polygamy Vary for Males and Females in the

Acorn Woodpecker (Melanerpes formicivorus)" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/P

MC8370801). Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 208 (1957): 20210579. doi:10.1098/rspb.2021.0579 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2021.0579).

PMC 8370801 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8370801). PMID 34403633 (h

ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34403633).

224. Short, Lester L. (1993). Birds of the World and their Behavior (https://archive.org/details/lives

ofbirdsbird00shor). New York: Henry Holt and Co. ISBN 0-8050-1952-9.

225. Burton, R (1985). Bird Behavior (https://archive.org/details/birdbehavior0000burt). Alfred A.

Knopf, Inc. ISBN 0-394-53957-5.

226. Schamel, D; Tracy, Diane M.; Lank, David B.; Westneat, David F. (2004). "Mate guarding,

copulation strategies and paternity in the sex-role reversed, socially polyandrous red-necked

phalarope Phalaropus lobatus". Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 57 (2): 110–118.

doi:10.1007/s00265-004-0825-2 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs00265-004-0825-2).

S2CID 26038182 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:26038182).

227. Attenborough, David (1998). The Life of Birds. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-01633-X.

228. Bagemihl, Bruce (1999). Biological exuberance: Animal homosexuality and natural diversity.

New York: St. Martin's. pp. 479–655.

229. MacFarlane, Geoff R.; Blomberg, Simon P.; Kaplan, Gisela; Rogers, Lesley J. (1 January

2007). "Same-sex sexual behavior in birds: expression is related to social mating system

and state of development at hatching" (https://academic.oup.com/beheco/article/18/1/21/209

396). Behavioral Ecology. 18 (1): 21–33. doi:10.1093/beheco/arl065 (https://doi.org/10.109

3%2Fbeheco%2Farl065). hdl:10.1093/beheco/arl065 (https://hdl.handle.net/10.1093%2Fbe

heco%2Farl065). ISSN 1045-2249 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/1045-2249).

230. Kokko, H; Harris, M; Wanless, S (2004). "Competition for breeding sites and site-dependent

population regulation in a highly colonial seabird, the common guillemot Uria aalge" (https://

doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0021-8790.2004.00813.x). Journal of Animal Ecology. 73 (2): 367–376.

Bibcode:2004JAnEc..73..367K (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004JAnEc..73..367K).

doi:10.1111/j.0021-8790.2004.00813.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0021-8790.2004.00813.

x).

231. Booker, L; Booker, M (1991). "Why Are Cuckoos Host Specific?". Oikos. 57 (3): 301–309.

doi:10.2307/3565958 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3565958). JSTOR 3565958 (https://www.js

tor.org/stable/3565958).

232. Hansell, M (2000). Bird Nests and Construction Behaviour. University of Cambridge Press.

ISBN 0-521-46038-7.

233. Lafuma, L.; Lambrechts, M.; Raymond, M. (2001). "Aromatic plants in bird nests as a

protection against blood-sucking flying insects?". Behavioural Processes. 56 (2): 113–120.

doi:10.1016/S0376-6357(01)00191-7 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0376-6357%2801%2900

191-7). PMID 11672937 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11672937). S2CID 43254694 (http

s://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:43254694).

234. Collias, Nicholas E.; Collias, Elsie C. (1984). Nest building and bird behavior. Princeton, NJ:

Princeton University Press. pp. 16–17, 26. ISBN 0691083584.

235. Warham, J. (1990). The Petrels: Their Ecology and Breeding Systems. London: Academic

Press. ISBN 0-12-735420-4.

236. Jones, DN; Dekker, René WRJ; Roselaar, Cees S (1995). "The Megapodes". Bird Families

of the World 3. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-854651-3.

237. "AnAge: The animal ageing and longevity database" (http://genomics.senescence.info/speci

es/). Human Ageing and Genomics Resources. Retrieved 26 September 2014.





238. "Animal diversity web" (http://animaldiversity.ummz.umich.edu/). University of Michigan, Museum of Zoology. Retrieved 26 September 2014.

239. Urfi, A. J. (2011). The Painted Stork: Ecology and Conservation (https://books.google.com/bo

oks?id=_9tczTapYXMC&pg=PA88). Springer Science & Business Media. p. 88. ISBN 978-1-

4419-8468-5.

240. Khanna, D. R. (2005). Biology of Birds (https://books.google.com/books?id=fDblIChi7KwC&

pg=PA109). Discovery Publishing House. p. 109. ISBN 978-81-7141-933-3.

241. Scott, Lynnette (2008). Wildlife Rehabilitation (https://books.google.com/books?id=FpAOAQ

AAMAAJ). National Wildlife Rehabilitators Association. p. 50. ISBN 978-1-931439-23-7.

242. Elliot, A (1994). "Family Megapodiidae (Megapodes)". In del Hoyo, J.; Elliott, A.; Sargatal, J.

(eds.). Handbook of the Birds of the World. Vol. 2: New World Vultures to Guineafowl.

Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-15-6.

243. Metz, V. G.; Schreiber, E. A. (2002). "Great Frigatebird ( Fregata minor)". In Poole, A.; Gill, F.

(eds.). The Birds of North America, No 681. Philadelphia: The Birds of North America Inc.

244. Young, Euan (1994). Skua and Penguin. Predator and Prey. Cambridge University Press.

p. 453.

245. Ekman, J. (2006). "Family living amongst birds". Journal of Avian Biology. 37 (4): 289–298.

doi:10.1111/j.2006.0908-8857.03666.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.2006.0908-8857.03666.

x).

246. Cockburn A (1996). "Why do so many Australian birds cooperate? Social evolution in the

Corvida". In Floyd R, Sheppard A, de Barro P (eds.). Frontiers in Population Ecology.

Melbourne: CSIRO. pp. 21–42.

247. Cockburn, Andrew (2006). "Prevalence of different modes of parental care in birds" (https://w

ww.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1560291). Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 273

(1592): 1375–1383. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3458 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2005.345

8). PMC 1560291 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1560291).

PMID 16777726 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16777726).

248. Gaston, AJ (1994). "Ancient Murrelet ( Synthliboramphus antiquus)". In Poole, A.; Gill, F.

(eds.). The Birds of North America, No. 132. Philadelphia & Washington, D.C.: The Academy

of Natural Sciences & The American Ornithologists' Union.

249. Schaefer, H. C.; Eshiamwata, G. W.; Munyekenye, F. B.; Böhning-Gaese, K. (2004). "Life-

history of two African Sylvia warblers: low annual fecundity and long post-fledging care". Ibis.

146 (3): 427–437. doi:10.1111/j.1474-919X.2004.00276.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1474-

919X.2004.00276.x).

250. Alonso, J. C.; Bautista, L. M.; Alonso, J. A. (2004). "Family-based territoriality vs flocking in

wintering common cranes Grus grus". Journal of Avian Biology. 35 (5): 434–444.

doi:10.1111/j.0908-8857.2004.03290.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0908-8857.2004.03290.

x). hdl:10261/43767 (https://hdl.handle.net/10261%2F43767).

251. Davies, N. (2000). Cuckoos, Cowbirds and other Cheats. London: T. & A. D. Poyser. ISBN 0-

85661-135-2.

252. Sorenson, M. (1997). "Effects of intra- and interspecific brood parasitism on a precocial host,

the canvasback, Aythya valisineria" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2F8.2.153).

Behavioral Ecology. 8 (2): 153–161. doi:10.1093/beheco/8.2.153 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2

Fbeheco%2F8.2.153).

253. Spottiswoode, C. N.; Colebrook-Robjent, J. F. R. (2007). "Egg puncturing by the brood

parasitic Greater Honeyguide and potential host counteradaptations" (https://doi.org/10.109

3%2Fbeheco%2Farm025). Behavioral Ecology. 18 (4): 792–799.

doi:10.1093/beheco/arm025 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2Farm025).

hdl:10.1093/beheco/arm025 (https://hdl.handle.net/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2Farm025).





254. Edwards, DB (2012). "Immune investment is explained by sexual selection and pace-of-life,

but not longevity in parrots (Psittaciformes)" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC

3531452). PLOS ONE. 7 (12): e53066. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...753066E (https://ui.adsabs.ha

rvard.edu/abs/2012PLoSO...753066E). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0053066 (https://doi.org/10.

1371%2Fjournal.pone.0053066). PMC 3531452 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/

PMC3531452). PMID 23300862 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23300862).

255. Doutrelant, C; Grégoire, A; Midamegbe, A; Lambrechts, M; Perret, P (January 2012). "Female

plumage coloration is sensitive to the cost of reproduction. An experiment in blue tits" (https://

doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1365-2656.2011.01889.x). Journal of Animal Ecology. 81 (1): 87–96.

Bibcode:2012JAnEc..81...87D (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012JAnEc..81...87D).

doi:10.1111/j.1365-2656.2011.01889.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1365-2656.2011.01889.

x). PMID 21819397 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21819397).

256. Hemmings NL, Slate J, Birkhead TR (2012). "Inbreeding causes early death in a passerine

bird" (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fncomms1870). Nat Commun. 3: 863.

Bibcode:2012NatCo...3..863H (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012NatCo...3..863H).

doi:10.1038/ncomms1870 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fncomms1870). PMID 22643890 (http

s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22643890).

257. Hemmings, N. L.; Slate, J.; Birkhead, T. R. (29 May 2012). "Inbreeding causes early death in

a passerine bird" (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fncomms1870). Nature Communications. 3 (1): 863. Bibcode:2012NatCo...3..863H (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012NatCo...3..863

H). doi:10.1038/ncomms1870 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fncomms1870). ISSN 2041-1723

(https://www.worldcat.org/issn/2041-1723). PMID 22643890 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.go

v/22643890).

258. Keller LF, Grant PR, Grant BR, Petren K (2002). "Environmental conditions affect the

magnitude of inbreeding depression in survival of Darwin's finches". Evolution. 56 (6): 1229–

1239. doi:10.1111/j.0014-3820.2002.tb01434.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0014-3820.200

2.tb01434.x). PMID 12144022 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12144022).

S2CID 16206523 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16206523).

259. Kingma, SA; Hall, ML; Peters, A (2013). "Breeding synchronization facilitates extrapair

mating for inbreeding avoidance" (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fbeheco%2Fart078).

Behavioral Ecology. 24 (6): 1390–1397. doi:10.1093/beheco/art078 (https://doi.org/10.109

3%2Fbeheco%2Fart078). hdl:10.1093/beheco/art078 (https://hdl.handle.net/10.1093%2Fbe

heco%2Fart078).

260. Szulkin M, Sheldon BC (2008). "Dispersal as a means of inbreeding avoidance in a wild bird

population" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2596843). Proc. Biol. Sci. 275

(1635): 703–711. doi:10.1098/rspb.2007.0989 (https://doi.org/10.1098%2Frspb.2007.0989).

PMC 2596843 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2596843). PMID 18211876 (h

ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18211876).

261. Nelson-Flower MJ, Hockey PA, O'Ryan C, Ridley AR (2012). "Inbreeding avoidance

mechanisms: dispersal dynamics in cooperatively breeding southern pied babblers" (https://

doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1365-2656.2012.01983.x). J Anim Ecol. 81 (4): 876–883.

Bibcode:2012JAnEc..81..876N (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012JAnEc..81..876N).

doi:10.1111/j.1365-2656.2012.01983.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1365-2656.2012.01983.

x). PMID 22471769 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22471769).

262. Riehl C, Stern CA (2015). "How cooperatively breeding birds identify relatives and avoid

incest: New insights into dispersal and kin recognition". BioEssays. 37 (12): 1303–1308.

doi:10.1002/bies.201500120 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fbies.201500120). PMID 26577076

(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26577076). S2CID 205476732 (https://api.semanticscholar.

org/CorpusID:205476732).





263. Charlesworth D, Willis JH (2009). "The genetics of inbreeding depression". Nat. Rev. Genet.

10 (11): 783–796. doi:10.1038/nrg2664 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnrg2664).

PMID 19834483 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19834483). S2CID 771357 (https://api.se

manticscholar.org/CorpusID:771357).

264. Bernstein H, Hopf FA, Michod RE (1987). "The Molecular Basis of the Evolution of Sex".

Molecular Genetics of Development. Advances in Genetics. Vol. 24. pp. 323–370.

doi:10.1016/s0065-2660(08)60012-7 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fs0065-2660%2808%29600

12-7). ISBN 9780120176243. PMID 3324702 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3324702).

265. Michod, R.E. (1994). Eros and Evolution: A Natural Philosophy of Sex. Reading,

Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0201442328.

266. Gong, Lixin; Shi, Biye; Wu, Hui; Feng, Jiang; Jiang, Tinglei (2021). "Who's for dinner? Bird

prey diversity and choice in the great evening bat, Ia io" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ar

ticles/PMC8258197). Ecology and Evolution. 11 (13): 8400–8409.

Bibcode:2021EcoEv..11.8400G (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021EcoEv..11.8400G).

doi:10.1002/ece3.7667 (https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fece3.7667). ISSN 2045-7758 (https://ww

w.worldcat.org/issn/2045-7758). PMC 8258197 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/P

MC8258197). PMID 34257905 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34257905).

267. Križanauskienė, Asta; Hellgren, Olof; Kosarev, Vladislav; Sokolov, Leonid; Bensch, Staffan;

Valkiūnas, Gediminas (2006). "Variation in host specificty between species of avian

hemosporidian parasites: evidence from parasite morphology and cytochrome b gene

sequences" (http://www.bioone.org/doi/abs/10.1645/GE-873R.1). Journal of Parasitology. 92

(6): 1319–1324. doi:10.1645/GE-873R.1 (https://doi.org/10.1645%2FGE-873R.1).

ISSN 0022-3395 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0022-3395). PMID 17304814 (https://pubme

d.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17304814). S2CID 27746219 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:2

7746219).

268. Clout, M; Hay, J (1989). "The importance of birds as browsers, pollinators and seed

dispersers in New Zealand forests" (http://www.newzealandecology.org/nzje/free_issues/NZ

JEcol12_s_27.pdf) (PDF). New Zealand Journal of Ecology. 12: 27–33.

269. Stiles, F. Gary (1981). "Geographical Aspects of Bird-Flower Coevolution, with Particular

Reference to Central America" (https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/part/38387). Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden. 68 (2): 323–351. doi:10.2307/2398801 (https://doi.org/10.2307%

2F2398801). JSTOR 2398801 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/2398801). S2CID 87692272 (http

s://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:87692272).

270. Temeles, E.; Linhart, Y.; Masonjones, M.; Masonjones, H. (2002). "The Role of Flower Width

in Hummingbird Bill Length–Flower Length Relationships" (http://www.amherst.edu/~ejtemel

es/Temeles%20et%20al%202002%20biotropica.pdf) (PDF). Biotropica. 34 (1): 68–80.

Bibcode:2002Biotr..34...68T (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2002Biotr..34...68T).

doi:10.1111/j.1744-7429.2002.tb00243.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1744-7429.2002.tb00

243.x). S2CID 16315843 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16315843).

271. Bond, William J.; Lee, William G.; Craine, Joseph M. (2004). "Plant structural defences

against browsing birds: a legacy of New Zealand's extinct moas". Oikos. 104 (3): 500–508.

Bibcode:2004Oikos.104..500B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004Oikos.104..500B).

doi:10.1111/j.0030-1299.2004.12720.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.0030-1299.2004.12720.

x).

272. Berner, Lewis; Hicks, Ellis A. (June 1959). "Checklist and Bibliography on the Occurrence of

Insects in Birds Nests" (http://archive.org/details/checklistbibliog00hick). The Florida Entomologist. 42 (2): 92. doi:10.2307/3492142 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3492142).

ISSN 0015-4040 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0015-4040). JSTOR 3492142 (https://www.js

tor.org/stable/3492142).





273. Boyes, Douglas H.; Lewis, Owen T. (2019). "Ecology of Lepidoptera associated with bird

nests in mid-Wales, UK" (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Feen.12669). Ecological Entomology. 44

(1): 1–10. Bibcode:2019EcoEn..44....1B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019EcoEn..44....

1B). doi:10.1111/een.12669 (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Feen.12669). ISSN 1365-2311 (http

s://www.worldcat.org/issn/1365-2311). S2CID 91557693 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/Cor

pusID:91557693).

274. Wainright, S.; Haney, J.; Kerr, C.; Golovkin, A.; Flint, M. (1998). "Utilization of nitrogen derived

from seabird guano by terrestrial and marine plants at St. Paul, Pribilof Islands, Bering Sea,

Alaska". Marine Biology. 131 (1): 63–71. Bibcode:1998MarBi.131...63W (https://ui.adsabs.ha

rvard.edu/abs/1998MarBi.131...63W). doi:10.1007/s002270050297 (https://doi.org/10.1007%

2Fs002270050297). S2CID 83734364 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:83734364).

275. Bosman, A.; Hockey, A. (1986). "Seabird guano as a determinant of rocky intertidal

community structure" (https://doi.org/10.3354%2Fmeps032247). Marine Ecology Progress

Series. 32: 247–257. Bibcode:1986MEPS...32..247B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/198

6MEPS...32..247B). doi:10.3354/meps032247 (https://doi.org/10.3354%2Fmeps032247).

276. Sutherland, William J.; Newton, Ian; Green, Rhys E. (2004). Bird Ecology and Conservation.

A Handbook of Techniques. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198520859.

277. Bonney, Rick; Rohrbaugh, Ronald Jr. (2004). Handbook of Bird Biology (Second ed.).

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-938027-62-X.

278. Dean, W. R. J.; Siegfried, W. ROY; MacDonald, I. A. W. (1990). "The Fallacy, Fact, and Fate

of Guiding Behavior in the Greater Honeyguide". Conservation Biology. 4 (1): 99–101.

Bibcode:1990ConBi...4...99D (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1990ConBi...4...99D).

doi:10.1111/j.1523-1739.1990.tb00272.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1523-1739.1990.tb00

272.x).

279. Singer, R.; Yom-Tov, Y. (1988). "The Breeding Biology of the House Sparrow Passer

domesticus in Israel". Ornis Scandinavica. 19 (2): 139–144. doi:10.2307/3676463 (https://do

i.org/10.2307%2F3676463). JSTOR 3676463 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/3676463).

280. Sundar, K. S. Gopi (2009). "Are rice paddies suboptimal breeding habitat for Sarus Cranes in

Uttar Pradesh, India?" (https://doi.org/10.1525/cond.2009.080032). The Condor. 111 (4): 611–623. doi:10.1525/cond.2009.080032 (https://doi.org/10.1525%2Fcond.2009.080032).

281. Kittur, Swati; Sundar, K. S. Gopi (2021). "Of irrigation canals and multifunctional agroforestry:

Traditional agriculture facilitates Woolly-necked Stork breeding in a north Indian agricultural

landscape" (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.gecco.2021.e01793). Global Ecology and

Conservation. 30: e01793. Bibcode:2021GEcoC..3001793K (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/a

bs/2021GEcoC..3001793K). doi:10.1016/j.gecco.2021.e01793 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.

gecco.2021.e01793).

282. Dolbeer, Richard (1990). "Ornithology and integrated pest management: Red-winged

blackbirds Agleaius phoeniceus and corn" (https://zenodo.org/record/1230653). Ibis. 132 (2): 309–322. doi:10.1111/j.1474-919X.1990.tb01048.x (https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1474-919X.

1990.tb01048.x).

283. Dolbeer, R.; Belant, J.; Sillings, J. (1993). "Shooting Gulls Reduces Strikes with Aircraft at

John F. Kennedy International Airport". Wildlife Society Bulletin. 21: 442–450.

284. Bryce, Emma (16 March 2016). "Will Wind Turbines Ever Be Safe for Birds?" (http://www.aud

ubon.org/news/will-wind-turbines-ever-be-safe-birds). Audubon. US: National Audubon

Society. Retrieved 19 March 2017.

285. Zimmer, Carl (19 September 2019). "Birds Are Vanishing From North America" (https://www.

nytimes.com/2019/09/19/science/bird-populations-america-canada.html?campaign_id=60&i

nstance_id=0&segment_id=17168&user_id=579ae23cfcbd75c9aac87cb571cc201c&regi_id

=72995439ing-news). The New York Times. Retrieved 19 September 2019.





286. Reed, K. D.; Meece, J. K.; Henkel, J. S.; Shukla, S. K. (2003). "Birds, Migration and

Emerging Zoonoses: West Nile Virus, Lyme Disease, Influenza A and Enteropathogens" (htt

ps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1069015). Clinical Medicine & Research. 1 (1): 5–12. doi:10.3121/cmr.1.1.5 (https://doi.org/10.3121%2Fcmr.1.1.5). PMC 1069015 (https://w

ww.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1069015). PMID 15931279 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.

nih.gov/15931279).

287. Brown, Lester (2005). "3: Moving Up the Food Chain Efficiently." (http://www.earth-policy.org/

datacenter/xls/book_ote_ch3_2.xls). Outgrowing the Earth: The Food Security Challenge in an Age of Falling Water Tables and Rising Temperatures. earthscan. ISBN 978-1-84407-

185-2.

288. "Poultry species: Gateway to poultry production and products" (https://www.fao.org/poultry-pr

oduction-products/production/poultry-species/en/). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. FAO. Retrieved 27 January 2023.

289. Hamilton, S. (2000). "How precise and accurate are data obtained using. an infrared scope

on burrow-nesting sooty shearwaters Puffinus griseus?" (http://www.marineornithology.org/P

DF/28_1/28_1_1.pdf) (PDF). Marine Ornithology. 28 (1): 1–6. Archived (https://ghostarchive.

org/archive/20221009/http://www.marineornithology.org/PDF/28_1/28_1_1.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

290. Keane, Aidan; Brooke, M. de L.; McGowan, P. J. K. (2005). "Correlates of extinction risk and

hunting pressure in gamebirds (Galliformes)". Biological Conservation. 126 (2): 216–233.

Bibcode:2005BCons.126..216K (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2005BCons.126..216K).

doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2005.05.011 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.biocon.2005.05.011).

291. "The Guano War of 1865–1866" (http://www.zum.de/whkmla/military/19cen/guanowar.html).

World History at KMLA. Retrieved 18 December 2007.

292. Cooney, R.; Jepson, P. (2006). "The international wild bird trade: what's wrong with blanket

bans?" (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0030605306000056). Oryx. 40 (1): 18–23.

doi:10.1017/S0030605306000056 (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0030605306000056).

293. Manzi, M.; Coomes, O. T. (2002). "Cormorant fishing in Southwestern China: a Traditional

Fishery under Siege. (Geographical Field Note)". Geographical Review. 92 (4): 597–603.

doi:10.2307/4140937 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F4140937). JSTOR 4140937 (https://www.js

tor.org/stable/4140937).

294. Pullis La Rouche, G. (2006). "Birding in the United States: a demographic and economic

analysis". In Boere, G. C.; Galbraith, C. A.; Stroud, D. A. (eds.). Waterbirds around the world

(https://web.archive.org/web/20110304124708/http://www.jncc.gov.uk/PDF/pub07_waterbird

s_part6.2.5.pdf) (PDF). Edinburgh: The Stationery Office. pp. 841–846. Archived from the

original (http://www.jncc.gov.uk/PDF/pub07_waterbirds_part6.2.5.pdf) (PDF) on 4 March 2011.

295. Chamberlain, D. E.; Vickery, J. A.; Glue, D. E.; Robinson, R. A.; Conway, G. J.; Woodburn, R.

J. W.; Cannon, A. R. (2005). "Annual and seasonal trends in the use of garden feeders by

birds in winter". Ibis. 147 (3): 563–575. doi:10.1111/j.1474-919x.2005.00430.x (https://doi.or

g/10.1111%2Fj.1474-919x.2005.00430.x).

296. Routledge, S.; Routledge, K. (1917). "The Bird Cult of Easter Island". Folklore. 28 (4): 337–

355. doi:10.1080/0015587X.1917.9719006 (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F0015587X.1917.971

9006). S2CID 4216509 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4216509).

297. Ingersoll, Ernest (1923). "Birds in legend, fable and folklore" (https://archive.org/details/birdsi

nlegendfab00inge). Longmans, Green and Co. p. 214 – via Wayback Machine.

298. Hauser, A. J. (1985). "Jonah: In Pursuit of the Dove". Journal of Biblical Literature. 104 (1):

21–37. doi:10.2307/3260591 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3260591). JSTOR 3260591 (http

s://www.jstor.org/stable/3260591).





299. Thankappan Nair, P. (1974). "The Peacock Cult in Asia". Asian Folklore Studies. 33 (2): 93–

170. doi:10.2307/1177550 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1177550). JSTOR 1177550 (https://w

ww.jstor.org/stable/1177550).

300. Botterweck, G. Johannes; Ringgren, Helmer (1990). Theological Dictionary of the Old

Testament (https://books.google.com/books?id=MCOd-uAEQy0C&q=Ishtar%20doves&pg=P

A35). Vol. VI. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co. pp. 35–36. ISBN 0-

8028-2330-0.

301. Lewis, Sian; Llewellyn-Jones, Lloyd (2018). The Culture of Animals in Antiquity: A

Sourcebook with Commentaries (https://books.google.com/books?id=GvJFDwAAQBAJ&q=I

shtar%20doves&pg=PT335). New York City, New York and London, England: Routledge.

p. 335. ISBN 978-1-315-20160-3.

302. Resig, Dorothy D. (9 February 2013). "The Enduring Symbolism of Doves, From Ancient

Icon to Biblical Mainstay" (https://web.archive.org/web/20130131120659/http://www.bib-arch.

org/e-features/enduring-doves.asp). BAR Magazine Bib-arch.org. Archived from the original

(http://www.bib-arch.org/e-features/enduring-doves.asp) on 31 January 2013. Retrieved 5 March 2013.

303. Cyrino, Monica S. (2010). Aphrodite (https://books.google.com/books?id=7gyVn5GjXPkC&q

=Aphrodite%20Monica%20S.%20Cyrino). Gods and Heroes of the Ancient World. New York City, New York and London, England: Routledge. pp. 120–123. ISBN 978-0-415-77523-6.

304. Tinkle, Theresa (1996). Medieval Venuses and Cupids: Sexuality, Hermeneutics, and

English Poetry (https://books.google.com/books?id=gjhLACGml2cC&q=Mary&pg=PA80).

Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. p. 81. ISBN 978-0804725156.

305. Simon, Erika (1983). Festivals of Attica: An Archaeological Companion (https://books.google.

com/books?id=IHFYM-IGCO8C&q=Aphrodisia%20festival&pg=PA48). Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 0-299-09184-8.

306. Deacy, Susan; Villing, Alexandra (2001). Athena in the Classical World. Leiden, The

Netherlands: Koninklijke Brill NV. ISBN 978-9004121423.

307. Deacy, Susan (2008). Athena (https://books.google.com/books?id=kIiCAgAAQBAJ&q=Athe

na%20and%20Ares%20Darmon&pg=PA163). London and New York City: Routledge.

pp. 34–37, 74–75. ISBN 978-0-415-30066-7.

308. Nilsson, Martin Persson (1950). The Minoan-Mycenaean Religion and Its Survival in Greek Religion (second ed.). New York City, New York: Biblo & Tannen. pp. 491–496. ISBN 0-

8196-0273-6.

309. Smith, S. (2011). "Generative landscapes: the step mountain motif in Tiwanaku iconography"

(https://web.archive.org/web/20190106203516/http://www.precolumbia.com/bearc/CAAS/AA

12.pdf) (PDF). Ancient America. 12: 1–69. Archived from the original (http://www.precolumbi

a.com/bearc/CAAS/AA12.pdf) (Automatic PDF download) on 6 January 2019. Retrieved

24 April 2014.

310. Meighan, C.W. (1966). "Prehistoric Rock Paintings in Baja California". American Antiquity.

31 (3): 372–392. doi:10.2307/2694739 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F2694739).

JSTOR 2694739 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/2694739). S2CID 163584284 (https://api.sema

nticscholar.org/CorpusID:163584284).

311. Conard, Nicholas J. (2003). "Palaeolithic ivory sculptures from southwestern Germany and

the origins of figurative art" (http://www.nature.com/articles/nature02186). Nature. 426 (6968): 830–832. Bibcode:2003Natur.426..830C (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003Natur.426..

830C). doi:10.1038/nature02186 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature02186). ISSN 0028-0836

(https://www.worldcat.org/issn/0028-0836). PMID 14685236 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.go

v/14685236). S2CID 4349167 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4349167).

312. Tennyson, A; Martinson, P (2006). Extinct Birds of New Zealand. Wellington: Te Papa Press.

ISBN 978-0-909010-21-8.





313. Clarke, CP (1908). "A Pedestal of the Platform of the Peacock Throne". The Metropolitan

Museum of Art Bulletin. 3 (10): 182–183. doi:10.2307/3252550 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3

252550). JSTOR 3252550 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/3252550).

314. "Birds of Mughal India – Shangri La" (https://www.shangrilahawaii.org/visit/exhibitions/birds-

of-mughal-india/). www.shangrilahawaii.org. Retrieved 6 June 2024.

315. "On Birds and Beauty - The Metropolitan Museum of Art" (https://www.metmuseum.org/article

s/concourse-of-the-birds). www.metmuseum.org. Retrieved 6 June 2024.

316. Boime, Albert (1999). "John James Audubon: a birdwatcher's fanciful flights". Art History. 22

(5): 728–755. doi:10.1111/1467-8365.00184 (https://doi.org/10.1111%2F1467-8365.00184).

317. Chandler, A. (1934). "The Nightingale in Greek and Latin Poetry". The Classical Journal. 30

(2): 78–84. JSTOR 3289944 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/3289944).

318. Lasky, E. D. (March 1992). "A Modern Day Albatross: The Valdez and Some of Life's Other

Spills". The English Journal. 81 (3): 44–46. doi:10.2307/820195 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F

820195). JSTOR 820195 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/820195).

319. Carson, A. (1998). "Vulture Investors, Predators of the 90s: An Ethical Examination". Journal

of Business Ethics. 17 (5): 543–555. doi:10.1023/A:1017974505642 (https://doi.org/10.102

3%2FA%3A1017974505642). S2CID 156972909 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:

156972909).

320. "US Warplane Aircraft Names" (https://www.uswarplanes.net/aircraftnames.pdf) (PDF).

uswarpalnes.net. Retrieved 24 March 2023.

321. Enriquez, P. L.; Mikkola, H. (1997). "Comparative study of general public owl knowledge in

Costa Rica, Central America and Malawi, Africa". In Duncan, J. R.; Johnson, D. H.; Nicholls,

T. H. (eds.). Biology and conservation of owls of the Northern Hemisphere. General

Technical Report NC-190. St. Paul, Minnesota: USDA Forest Service. pp. 160–166.

322. Lewis, DP (2005). "Owls in Mythology and Culture" (http://www.owlpages.com/articles.php?s

ection=Owl+Mythology&title=Myth+and+Culture). Owlpages.com. Retrieved 15 September 2007.

323. Dupree, N. (1974). "An Interpretation of the Role of the Hoopoe in Afghan Folklore and

Magic". Folklore. 85 (3): 173–193. doi:10.1080/0015587X.1974.9716553 (https://doi.org/10.1

080%2F0015587X.1974.9716553). JSTOR 1260073 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1260073).

324. Fox-Davies, A. C. (1985). A Complete Guide to Heraldry. Bloomsbury.

325. "Flag description - the World Factbook" (https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/field/flag-des

cription/).

326. "List of National Birds of All Countries" (https://www.vedantu.com/blog/national-birds-of-all-c

ountries).

327. Head, Matthew (1997). "Birdsong and the Origins of Music". Journal of the Royal Musical

Association. 122 (1): 1–23. doi:10.1093/jrma/122.1.1 (https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fjrma%2F12

2.1.1).

328. Clark, Suzannah (2001). Music Theory and Natural Order from the Renaissance to the Early

Twentieth Century. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-77191-9.

329. Reich, Ronni (15 October 2010). "NJIT professor finds nothing cuckoo in serenading our

feathered friends" (http://www.nj.com/entertainment/music/index.ssf/2010/10/njit_professor_fi

nds_nothing_c.html). Star Ledger. Retrieved 19 June 2011.

330. Taylor, Hollis (21 March 2011). "Composers' Appropriation of Pied Butcherbird Song: Henry

Tate's "undersong of Australia" Comes of Age" (http://www.jmro.org.au/index.php/mca2/articl

e/view/43). Journal of Music Research Online. 2.





331. Davin, Laurent; Tejero, José-Miguel; Simmons, Tal; Shaham, Dana; Borvon, Aurélia; Tourny,

Olivier; Bridault, Anne; Rabinovich, Rivka; Sindel, Marion; Khalaily, Hamudi; Valla, François

(2023). "Bone aerophones from Eynan-Mallaha (Israel) indicate imitation of raptor calls by

the last hunter-gatherers in the Levant" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1025

6695). Scientific Reports. 13 (1): 8709. Bibcode:2023NatSR..13.8709D (https://ui.adsabs.har

vard.edu/abs/2023NatSR..13.8709D). doi:10.1038/s41598-023-35700-9 (https://doi.org/10.1

038%2Fs41598-023-35700-9). ISSN 2045-2322 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/2045-2322).

PMC 10256695 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10256695). PMID 37296190

(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37296190).

332. Fuller, Errol (2000). Extinct Birds (2nd ed.). Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-850837-9.

333. Steadman, D. (2006). Extinction and Biogeography in Tropical Pacific Birds. University of

Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-77142-7.

334. "BirdLife International announces more Critically Endangered birds than ever before" (https://

web.archive.org/web/20130617183344/http://www.birdlife.org/news/pr/2009/05/red_list.htm

l). BirdLife International. 14 May 2009. Archived from the original (http://www.birdlife.org/new

s/pr/2009/05/red_list.html) on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2009.

335. Kinver, Mark (13 May 2009). "Birds at risk reach record high" (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/scie

nce/nature/8045971.stm). BBC News Online. Retrieved 15 May 2009.

336. "Nearly 3 Billion Birds Gone" (https://www.birds.cornell.edu/home/bring-birds-back/).

CornellLab. Retrieved 5 May 2024.

337. Axelson, Gustave (19 September 2019). "Vanishing: More Than 1 in 4 Birds Has

Disappeared in the Last 50 Years" (https://www.allaboutbirds.org/news/vanishing-1-in-4-bird

s-gone/). All About Birds. Retrieved 5 May 2024.

338. Norris, K; Pain, D, eds. (2002). Conserving Bird Biodiversity: General Principles and their

Application. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-78949-3.

339. Brothers, N. P. (1991). "Albatross mortality and associated bait loss in the Japanese longline

fishery in the southern ocean". Biological Conservation. 55 (3): 255–268.

Bibcode:1991BCons..55..255B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1991BCons..55..255B).

doi:10.1016/0006-3207(91)90031-4 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2F0006-3207%2891%299003

1-4).

340. Wurster, D.; Wurster, C.; Strickland, W. (July 1965). "Bird Mortality Following DDT Spray for

Dutch Elm Disease". Ecology. 46 (4): 488–499. Bibcode:1965Ecol...46..488W (https://ui.ads

abs.harvard.edu/abs/1965Ecol...46..488W). doi:10.2307/1934880 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2

F1934880). JSTOR 1934880 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/1934880). ; Wurster, C.F.; Wurster, D.H.; Strickland, W.N. (1965). "Bird Mortality after Spraying for Dutch Elm Disease with

DDT". Science. 148 (3666): 90–91. Bibcode:1965Sci...148...90W (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.e

du/abs/1965Sci...148...90W). doi:10.1126/science.148.3666.90 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fs

cience.148.3666.90). PMID 14258730 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14258730).

S2CID 26320497 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:26320497).

341. Blackburn, T.; Cassey, P.; Duncan, R.; Evans, K.; Gaston, K. (24 September 2004). "Avian

Extinction and Mammalian Introductions on Oceanic Islands". Science. 305 (5692): 1955–

1958. Bibcode:2004Sci...305.1955B (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004Sci...305.1955

B). doi:10.1126/science.1101617 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.1101617).

PMID 15448269 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15448269). S2CID 31211118 (https://api.s

emanticscholar.org/CorpusID:31211118).

342. Butchart, S.; Stattersfield, A.; Collar, N (2006). "How many bird extinctions have we

prevented?" (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0030605306000950). Oryx. 40 (3): 266–79.

doi:10.1017/S0030605306000950 (https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0030605306000950).





343. Sundar, K. S. Gopi; Subramanya, S. (2010). "Bird use of rice fields in the Indian

subcontinent" (http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.1675/063.033.s104). Waterbirds. 33 (Special Issue 1): 44–70. doi:10.1675/063.033.s104 (https://doi.org/10.1675%2F063.033.s104).





Further reading


All the Birds of the World, Lynx Edicions, 2020.

Del Hoyo, Josep; Elliott, Andrew; Sargatal, Jordi (eds.). Handbook of the Birds of the World

(17-volume encyclopaedia), Lynx Edicions, Barcelona, 1992–2010. ( Vol. 1: Ostrich to Ducks:

ISBN 978-84-87334-10-8, etc.).

Lederer, Roger; Carol Burr (2014). Latein für Vogelbeobachter: über 3000 ornithologische

Begriffe erklärt und erforscht, aus dem Englischen übersetzt von Susanne Kuhlmannn-Krieg,

Verlag DuMont, Köln, ISBN 978-3-8321-9491-8.

National Geographic Field Guide to Birds of North America, National Geographic, 7th

edition, 2017. ISBN 9781426218354

National Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Birds: Eastern Region, National

Audubon Society, Knopf.

National Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Birds: Western Region, National

Audubon Society, Knopf.

Svensson, Lars (2010). Birds of Europe, Princeton University Press, second edition.

ISBN 9780691143927

Svensson, Lars (2010). Collins Bird Guide: The Most Complete Guide to the Birds of Britain

and Europe, Collins, 2nd edition. ISBN 978-0007268146





External links


Birdlife International (http://www.birdlife.org/) – Dedicated to bird conservation worldwide;

has a database with about 250,000 records on endangered bird species.

Bird biogeography (http://people.eku.edu/ritchisong/birdbiogeography1.htm)

Birds and Science (https://web.archive.org/web/20100810134957/http://www.audubon.org/bi

rd/index.html) from the National Audubon Society

Cornell Lab of Ornithology (http://www.birds.cornell.edu/)

"Bird" (https://www.eol.org/pages/695) at the Encyclopedia of Life

Essays on bird biology (http://www.stanford.edu/group/stanfordbirds/text/essays/completed_

essays.html)

North American Birds for Kids (http://www.mrnussbaum.com/birdsindex.htm) Archived (http

s://web.archive.org/web/20100809090128/http://www.mrnussbaum.com/birdsindex.htm) 9

August 2010 at the Wayback Machine

Ornithology (http://www.ornithology.com/)

Sora (http://sora.unm.edu/) – Searchable online research archive; Archives of the following

ornithological journals The Auk, Condor, Journal of Field Ornithology' , North American Bird Bander, Studies in Avian Biology, Pacific Coast Avifauna, and the Wilson Bulletin.

The Internet Bird Collection (http://ibc.lynxeds.com/) – A free library of videos of the world's

birds

The Institute for Bird Populations, California (http://www.birdpop.org/)

List of field guides to birds (https://web.archive.org/web/20100323064035/http://media.library.

uiuc.edu/cgi/b/bib/bix-idx?c=bix%3Bcc%3Dbix%3Bsid%3D0c4f6243857204b94fcdebc6dce

5d8b2%3Btype%3Dsimple%3Bpage%3Dbrowse%3Binst%3Dbix_10%3Bsort%3Dregion),

from the International Field Guides database



RSPB bird identifier (http://www.rspb.org.uk/wildlife/birdidentifier/) Archived (https://web.archi

ve.org/web/20131105112202/http://www.rspb.org.uk/wildlife/birdidentifier/) 5 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine – Interactive identification of all UK birds

Are Birds Really Dinosaurs? (http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/diapsids/avians.html) —

University of California Museum of Paleontology.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bird&oldid=1227548338"





